



Man or Monster? : “Frankenstein” by Mary Shelley
Essay Proposal

Monika Cibulskis
Gothic Horror ENG 510 021















	In this essay, I plan to discuss the novel “Frankenstein” by Mary Shelley. Reading and speaking about Frankenstein, what shook me was the use of the word “monster”. In dictionary terms, monster has two different defined terms. One is “an imaginary creature that is typically large, ugly and frightening”. The other is “an inhumanely or cruel person”. In this critique, the word monster, is going to be used as the second, a more sociological approach. Both Victor and the monster, can be considered a “person”, although one has a much more unsightly appearance than the other. The beauty is only skin deep, as their true colours show throughout the novel, unraveling who the real monster is. 

	My essay will be  a critique on human nature and moral grounds. In this sense, focusing on the characters of Victor Frankenstein and the monster he creates, I will be asking the question “Who is the real monster?”. I will be examining the novel's cultural anxieties about the monster, one who is seen as different from the norm of society, and questioning whether he is the immoral one, or  whether society is for placing judgment upon him.

	One argument will focus on the human emotions the monster expresses throughout the novel. He may look monstrous, and some of his actions may be monstrous, but that is because of the way he is conditioned by society, as an outcast. Deep down, he wants to fit in and be loved. This will be shown through analysis of passages such as his desire for a female companion of his own type, the emotions he experiences when the De Laceys family turns away from him and his emotions towards Victor, as his creator, and their final words before Victor's death. 

	Another argument will focus on the monstrous emotions and actions that Victor Frankenstein expresses throughout the novel. As he can be seen as a normal figure of society, who held a beautiful life, he ruins it for his own selfish ideas of scientific discovery. This will be shown through analysis of passages such as his turning away of his love and family, his reactions when the monster is created, his disregard and turning away of the monster and his blatant disregard for the way his experiment impacted society. 

	Lastly, I will compare the novel, alongside movie adaptations of the novel to connect this concept with modern day ideas. There is various movie adaptions such as the 1931 James Whale version, the 1994 Kenneth Branagh version, and the 2015 adaptation called “Victor Frankenstein” by Paul McGuigan.  I will see whether more modern day adaptations of the film shine any other different lights on this cultural judgment and the characters inner thoughts. With comparing the various adaptations, I will determine whether Victor Frankenstein or his creation are truly depicted as the “monster” through use of cinema. 

	Through these examinations, although Frankenstein's creation is referred to as the “monster”, my essay claims to make the point that Victor Frankenstein is the real monster in his mannerisms and selfish acts. My essay will show that the monster, although in physical beauty may be one, is not the monster at all. My essay gives a critique on the idea of the “monster” in society. 


Monika Cibulskis

Department of English
Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada




Annotated Bibliography

	Wolf, Nadine. Nature and Civilisation in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein. Norderstedt Germany: Druck and Bindung. 2004. 

 	This book is an analysis into the themes of nature and civilization within the novel “Frankenstein”. It examines a contrast between the ideas of nature and civilization in the novel. It examines more deep-rooted ideas of what nature really is, and how Victor has error in understanding it. Then, it goes on to analyze the idea of civilization, the creature becoming so, and the differences between the two characters due to their level of education.

	Higgins, David. Frankenstein: Character Studies. New York: Continuum. 2008. 

	This book does an in-depth analysis of three characters in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein: Walton the Explorer, Frankenstein the scientist and the Creature. It gives a thorough analysis of each characters actions, motifs, and emotions. It uses quotes from the novel to back up the statements and provide a deeper understanding into each character. 

	Hitchcock, Susan Tyler. Frankenstein: A Cultural History. W.W. Norton. 2007. 

	This book goes through the full history of Frankenstein tales, dating all the way back to 1816. It shows the various ways that the creature has been depicted through time. This will help with my third analysis, taking a look at different adaptations of Frankenstein. 


	Gould, Stephen Jay. The Monster's Human Nature. Harvard University. Retrieved from http://www.ibiblio.org/schools/rls/garner/britishlit/nature.pdf

	This article is a Harvard University professors depiction of the monster having human nature, and Victor Frankenstein rejecting his duties as creator. His ideas, concepts and text examples relate back to my thesis and help underline my idea. 

