1

Cognitive Processing Therapy
Veteran/Military Version

Patricia A. Resick, Ph.D. and Candice M. Monson, Ph.D.
National Center for PTSD
Women’s Health Science Division
VA Boston Healthcare System and
Boston University
And
Kathleen M. Chard, Ph.D.
Cincinnati VA Medical Center and
University of Cincinnati

October, 2006

Correspondence should be addressed to Patricia Resick or Candice Monson, WHSD (116B-3),
VA Boston Healthcare System, 150 South Huntington Ave. Boston, MA 02130;
Patricia.Resick@va.gov or Candice.Monson@va.gov.
Copyright, © Patricia A. Resick, Ph.D. and Candice M. Monson, Ph.D. 10/01/06

2

Cognitive Processing Therapy: Veteran/Military Version
Part 1
Introduction to Cognitive Processing Therapy
Cognitive Processing Therapy (CPT) is a 12-session therapy that has been found effective
for both PTSD and other corollary symptoms following traumatic events (Monson et al, 2006;
Resick et al, 2002; Resick & Schnicke, 1992, 19931). Although the research on CPT focused on
rape victims originally, we have used the therapy successfully with a range of other traumatic
events, including military-related traumas. This revision of the manual is in response to requests
for a treatment manual that focuses exclusively on military trauma. The manual has been
updated to reflect changes in the therapy over time, particularly with an increase in the amount of
practice that is assigned and with some of the handouts. It also includes suggestions from almost
two decades of clinical experience with the therapy.
Also included in this manual is a module for traumatic bereavement. This module is not
included as one of the 12 sessions but could be added to the therapy. We recommend that the
session be added early in therapy, perhaps as the second session along with the educational
component on posttraumatic stress disorder. Although we expect PTSD to remit as a result of
treatment, we do not necessarily expect bereavement to remit. Grief is a normal reaction to loss
and is not a disorder. Bereavement may have a long and varied course. The goal of dealing with
grief issues within CPT is not to shorten the natural course of adjustment, but to remove blocks
and barriers (distorted cognitions, assumptions, expectations) that are interfering with normal
bereavement. Therefore, the focus is on normal grief, myths about bereavement, and stuck
points that therapists may need to focus on in this domain. If the bereavement session is added to
CPT, then the assignment to write an impact statement would be delayed one session (see
Session 1) for those who have PTSD due to a traumatic death. Another possibility is to have the
patients write two impact statements for those who both lost a loved one and have PTSD related
to something that happened to them directly. One statement would be about what it means that
the traumatic event happened to them. The other statement would be about what it means that the
loved one has died.
Many therapists were never trained to conduct manualized psychotherapies and may feel
uncomfortable with both the concept and the execution. It is important that the patient and
therapist agree on the goal for the therapy (trauma work for PTSD and related symptoms) so that
the goals do not drift or switch from session to session. Without a firm commitment to the
1

Monson, C.M., Schnurr, P.P., Resick, P.A., Friedman, M.J., Young-Xu, Y., & Stevens, S.P. (2006). Cognitive
processing therapy for veterans with military-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting &
Clinical Psychology, 74, 898-907.
Resick, P.A., Nishith, P., Weaver, T.L., Astin, M.C., & Feuer, C.A. (2002). A comparison of cognitive processing
therapy, prolonged exposure and a waiting condition for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder in
female rape victims. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 867-879.
Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1992). Cognitive processing therapy for sexual assault victims. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 748-756.
Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive processing therapy for rape victims: A treatment manual.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

3
treatment goals, when the therapy is “off track”, the therapist may not know whether to get back
on the protocol or to let it slide. As other topics arise, the therapist sometimes isn’t sure whether
or how to incorporate them into the sessions. A few words on these topics are appropriate here.
Once therapists have conducted protocol therapy a few times, they usually find that they become
more efficient and effective therapists. They learn to guide the therapy without tangents or
delays. They find they can develop rapport with patients through the use of Socratic questions
because the patients are explaining to the therapist exactly how they feel and think and the
therapist expresses interest and understanding with these questions. There is usually enough time
in the session to cover the material for the session and still have time for some other topics, such
as things that came up that week or considering other current issues related to their PTSD
(childrearing, job concerns marital issues, etc.). However if those are major issues, then the
therapist will need to prioritize the order. It would be inadvisable to try to deal with several
types of therapy for different problems simultaneously.
Normally, comorbid depression, anxiety, and dissociation remit along with PTSD, so we
rarely believe there is a need to deal with other symptoms independently of the PTSD protocol.
Substance dependence should be treated prior to addressing PTSD, but substance abusing
patients may be treated with CPT if there is a specific contract for not drinking abusively during
the therapy and if there is a specific focus on the suspected role of abusive drinking as avoidance
coping (for more information on comorbidity see Section 3). Typically we have the patients
focus on specific child, family, and marital issues after completing the course of PTSD
treatment. Sometimes those problems remit when the patient no longer has PTSD interfering
with functioning. Other considerations regarding comorbidity are found later in the manual.
Most veterans present for PTSD treatment many years after the traumatic event. They
are usually not in crisis and are able to handle their day-to-day lives (at whatever level they are
functioning) without constant intervention. Much of the disruption in the flow of therapy for
PTSD comes from avoidance attempts on the part of the patient. We point out avoidance
whenever we see it (e.g., changing the subject, showing up late for sessions), and remind the
patient that avoidance maintains PTSD symptoms. If the patient wants to discuss other issues, we
save time at the end of the session or attempt to incorporate their issues into the skills that are
being taught (i.e., A-B-C sheets, Challenging Questions, Patterns of Problematic Thinking,
Challenging Beliefs worksheets). If the patient does not bring in practice assignments, we do not
delay the session, but conduct the work in session and then reassign the practice assignment
along with the next assignment.
Returning OEF/OIF veterans may have different needs than older veterans. They may
prefer two sessions a week so that they can get therapy finished quickly. They may request early
morning or evening appointments to accommodate their jobs. They may want their PTSD
treatment augmented with couples counseling. They may appear a bit more “raw” than the very
chronic Vietnam veterans that most VA clinicians are accustomed to working with. The more
accessible emotions are actually an advantage in processing the traumatic events and in
motivating change, but therapists who have worked with only very chronic (and numbed)
veterans may become alarmed when they first work with these patients. They may think that
strong emotions or dissociation should be stabilized or medicated first. However, CPT was
developed and tested first with rape victims who may also be very acute and very emotional. As

4
long as patients are willing to engage in therapy and can contract against self-harm and acting
out, there is no reason to assume that they need to wait for treatment.
It is recommended that the patient be assessed, not just before and after treatment, but
during treatment as well. We typically give patients a brief PTSD scale and a depression scale
(if comorbid depression is a problem) once a week. Most often there is a large drop in symptoms
when the assimilation about the trauma is resolving. Typically this occurs around the 5th or 6th
session with the written exposure and cognitive therapy focusing on the traumatic event itself.
Occasionally this takes longer, but with frequent assessment, the therapist can monitor the
progress and see when the shift occurs.
Theory
CPT is based on a social cognitive theory of PTSD that focuses on how the traumatic event
is construed and coped with by a person who is trying to regain a sense of mastery and control in
his/her life. The other major theory explaining PTSD is Lang’s2 (1977) information processing
theory, which was extended to PTSD by Foa, Steketee, and Rothbaum3 (1989) in their emotional
processing theory of PTSD. In this theory, PTSD is believed to emerge due to the development of
a fear network in memory that elicits escape and avoidance behavior. Mental fear structures
include stimuli, responses, and meaning elements. Anything associated with the trauma may elicit
the fear structure or schema and subsequent avoidance behavior. The fear network in people with
PTSD is thought to be stable and broadly generalized so that it is easily accessed. When the fear
network is activated by reminders of the trauma, the information in the network enters
consciousness (intrusive symptoms). Attempts to avoid this activation result in the avoidance
symptoms of PTSD. According to emotional processing theory, repetitive exposure to the
traumatic memory in a safe environment will result in habituation of the fear and subsequent
change in the fear structure. As emotion decreases, patients with PTSD will begin to modify their
meaning elements spontaneously and will change their self-statements and reduce their
generalization. Repeated exposures to the traumatic memory are thought to result in habituation or
a change in the information about the event, and subsequently, the fear structure.
Although social cognitive theories are not incompatible with information/emotional
processing theories, these theories focus beyond the development of a fear network to other
pertinent affective responses such as horror, anger, sadness, humiliation, or guilt. Some emotions
such as fear, anger, or sadness may emanate directly from the trauma (primary emotions),
because the event is interpreted as dangerous, abusive, and/or resulting in losses. It is possible
that secondary, or manufactured, emotions can also result from faulty interpretations made by the
patient. For example, if someone is intentionally attacked by another person, the danger of the
situation would lead to a fight-flight response and the attending emotions might be anger or fear
(primary). However, if in the aftermath, the person blamed himself or herself for the attack, the
person might experience shame or embarrassment. These manufactured emotions would have
2

Lang, P. J. (1977). Imagery in therapy: An information processing analysis of fear. Behavior Therapy, 8, 862-886.

3

Foa, E. B., Steketee, G. S., & Rothbaum, B. 0. (1989). Behavioral/cognitive conceptualizations of posttraumatic
stress disorder. Behavior Therapy, 20, 155-176.

5
resulted from thoughts and interpretations about the event, rather than the event itself. As long as
the individual keeps saying that the event was their fault, they keep producing shame (hence,
manufactured).
Social-cognitive theories focus more on the content of cognitions and the effect that
distorted cognitions have upon emotional responses and behavior. In order to reconcile the
information about the traumatic event with prior schemas, people tend to do one or more of three
things: assimilate, accommodate, or over-accommodate. Assimilation is altering the incoming
information to match prior beliefs (“Because a bad thing happened to me, I must have been
punished for something I did”). Accommodation is altering beliefs enough to incorporate the
new information (“Although I didn’t use good judgment in that situation, most of the time I make
good decisions”). Over-accommodation is altering ones beliefs about oneself and the world to
the extreme in order to feel safer and more in control (“I can’t ever trust my judgment again”).
Obviously, therapists are working toward accommodation, a balance in beliefs that takes into
account the reality of the traumatic event without going overboard.
In a social-cognitive model, affective expression is needed, not for habituation, but in
order for the affective elements of the stored trauma memory to be changed. It is assumed that
the natural affect, once accessed, will dissipate rather quickly, and will no longer be stored with
the trauma memory. Also, the work of accommodating the memory and beliefs can begin. Once
faulty beliefs regarding the event (self-blame, guilt) and over-generalized beliefs about oneself
and the world (e.g. safety, trust, control esteem, intimacy) are challenged, then the secondary
emotions will also decrease along with the intrusive reminders. The explanation that CPT
therapists give to patients about this process is described in Session 1 along with a handout in the
patient materials section.
Because we know that PTSD symptoms are nearly universal immediately following a
serious traumatic stressor and that recovery takes a few months under normal circumstances, it
may be best to think about diagnosable PTSD as a disruption or stalling out of a normal recovery
process, rather than the development of a unique psychopathology. The therapist needs to
determine what has interfered with normal recovery. In one case, it may be that the patient
believes that he will be overwhelmed by the amount of affect that will emerge if he stops
avoiding and numbing himself. Perhaps he was taught as a child that emotions are bad, that “real
men” don’t have feelings and that he should “just get over it”. In another case, a patient may
have refused to talk about what happened with anyone because she blames herself for “letting”
the event happen and she is so shamed and humiliated that she is convinced that others will
blame her too. In a third case, a patient saw something so horrifying that every time he falls
asleep and dreams about it, he wakes up in a cold sweat. In order to sleep, he has started drinking
heavily. Another patient is so convinced that she will be victimized again that she refuses to go
out any more and has greatly restricted her activities and relationships. In still another case, in
which other people were killed, a patient experiences survivor guilt and obsesses over why he
was spared when others were killed. He feels unworthy and experiences guilt whenever he
laughs or finds himself enjoying something. In all of these cases, thoughts or avoidance
behaviors are interfering with emotional processing and cognitive restructuring. There are as
many individual examples of things that can block a smooth recovery as there are individuals
with PTSD.

6

Overview
The contents of each session are described along with issues that therapists are likely to
encounter. The therapy begins with an education component about PTSD and the patient is asked
to write an Impact Statement in order for the patient and therapist to begin to identify problem
areas in thinking about the event (i.e., “stuck points”). The patient is then taught to identify and
label thoughts and feelings and to recognize the relationship between them. Then the next two
sessions focus on generating a written account of the worst traumatic incident, which is read to
the therapist in session. During the first five sessions, the therapist uses Socratic questioning to
begin to challenge distorted cognitions, particularly those associated with assimilation like selfblame, hindsight bias and other guilt cognitions. Thereafter, the sessions focus on teaching the
patient cognitive therapy skills and finally focus on specific topics that are likely to have been
disrupted by the traumatic event: safety, trust, power/control, esteem, and intimacy.
After the individual CPT protocol is described in detail, there are subsequent sections on
using the protocol without the written trauma exposure component, a section on delivering CPT
in a group format and a section on treatment issues with comorbid disorders,
It is strongly recommended that the protocol be implemented in the order presented here.
The skills and exercises are designed to build upon one another, and even the modules in the last
five sessions follow in the hierarchical order in which they are likely to emerge with patients.
However, when used individually, the last five sessions may be modified depending upon the
particular issues that a patient reports. For example, if a patient has severe safety issues, but no
issues with esteem or intimacy, then the therapist may want to skip the later two modules and
focus more time on safety. Conversely, if someone had no safety or control issues but was
primarily troubled with self-trust and self-esteem issues, then the therapist may want to spend
more time on those modules. However, even if a patient has not mentioned an issue within a
particular domain of functioning (safety, trust, power/control, esteem, intimacy), it may be
helpful for him to read the module and complete worksheets on any stuck points that become
apparent. It is not unusual for the modules to reveal issues that had not been identified earlier in
therapy.
The usual format for sessions is to begin with review of the practice assignments,
followed by the content of each specific session. During the last 15 minutes of the session, the
assignment for the next week is introduced and is accompanied by the necessary explanation,
definition(s), and handout. It is not recommended that the therapist start a general discussion at
the beginning of the session, but should begin immediately with the practice assignment that was
assigned. If the patient wishes to speak about other topics, we either use the topic to teach the
new skills we are introducing (e.g., put the content on an A-B-C sheet) or we save time at the end
for these other topics, reinforcing the trauma work with discussion of the topic. If the therapist
allows the patient to direct the therapy away from the protocol, the avoidance will be reinforced,
along with disruption in the flow of the therapy. In addition, placing the practice assignments last
in the session will send a message to the patient that the practice assignments are not very
important and may lead to less treatment adherence on the part of the patient. Among the most
difficult skills for the therapist to master, especially if s/he has been trained in more non-directive

7
therapies, is how to be empathic but firm in maintaining the protocol. If a patient does not bring
in his/her practice assignment one session, it does not mean that the therapy is delayed for a
week. The therapist has the patient do the assignment orally (or they complete a worksheet
together) in the session and reassigns the uncompleted assignment along with the next
assignment.
Part 2
Cognitive Processing Therapy: Session by Session
It is presumed that the therapist will have conducted some form of assessment of the patient’s
traumatic event and persistent symptoms, and specifically contracted to do a course of CPT prior
to undertaking the first session. At least a brief assessment of PTSD and depressive symptoms
should be conducted. There are several brief PTSD checklists and depression scales that can be
used to assess pretreatment symptoms, as well as to conduct repeated assessments during therapy
to monitor the course of treatment.
Session 1: Introduction and Education Phase
Therapist Overview
Overall, there are several goals for the first session: 1) build rapport with the patient, 2)
to educate the patient regarding symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder and depression, 3) to
provide a rationale for treatment based on a cognitive conceptualization of PTSD, 4) to lay out
the course of treatment, and 5) to elicit treatment compliance.
It is necessary to address compliance early in the course of therapy because avoidance
behavior (half of the symptoms of PTSD) can interfere with successful treatment. We are
concerned with two forms of compliance: attendance and completion of out-of-session practice
assignments. It is strongly recommended that patients attend all sessions and complete all
assignments in order to benefit fully from therapy. We attempt to set the expectation that
therapy benefit is dependent on the amount of effort they invest through practice assignment
compliance and practice with new skills. It may be helpful to remind the patient that what he4 has
been doing has not been working, and that it will be important to tackle issues head-on rather
than continue to avoid. Avoidance of affective experience and expression should also be
addressed.
In this session, patients are also given the opportunity to ask any questions they may have
about the therapy. Sometimes patients’ stuck points become evident in the questions and
concerns they express during this first session. And finally, as with all therapies, rapport
building is crucial for effective therapy. The patient needs to feel understood and listened to,
otherwise she may not return.

4

Because of the awkwardness of the English language and the desire to refer to a single patient, the pronouns “he”
and “she” will be used alternately, rather than saying “she/he”, “him/her” throughout the manual. The term soldier
will also be used as a generic term rather than soldier, marine, sailor, airman etc., and will be used interchangeably
with veteran.

8
Patients sometimes arrive with a press to speak about their story. However, the therapist
should prevent the patient from engaging in an extended exposure session at the first session.
Intense affect and graphic details of an event, disclosed before any type of rapport or trust has
been established, may well lead to premature termination from therapy. The patient is likely to
assume that the therapist holds the same opinions regarding his guilt, shame, or worthlessness
that he, the patient, holds, and may be afraid to return to therapy after such a disclosure.
Other patients will be very reluctant to discuss the traumatic event and will be quite
relieved that they do not have to describe it in detail during the first session. In these cases, the
therapist may have to draw out even a brief description of the event. Dissociation when
attempting to think about or talk about the event is common. An initial assessment session grants
the patient and therapist the opportunity to get acquainted before the therapy begins, and allows
the therapist to provide the patient with a description of what the therapy will entail. In this first
session, it is important that the therapist remind the patient that CPT is a very structured form of
therapy, and that the first session is a bit different from the others because the therapist will do
more talking. The therapist begins with a description of the symptoms of PTSD and a cognitive
formulation of them.
Therapist explanations to patient
1. PTSD symptoms
"In going over the results of your testing, we found that you are suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder. The symptoms of PTSD fall into three clusters. The first cluster is the
re-experiencing of the event in some way. This includes nightmares about the event or other
scary dreams; flashbacks, when you act or feel as if the incident is recurring; intrusive thoughts,
which are memories that suddenly pop into your mind. You might have the intrusive thoughts
when there is something in the environment to remind you of the event (including anniversaries
of the event) or even when there is nothing there to remind you of it. Common times to have
these memories are when you are falling asleep, when you relax, or when you are bored. These
symptoms are all normal following such a traumatic event. You are not going crazy. Can you
give me examples of these experiences in your own life since the event?...
"A second set of symptoms concern arousal5. As might be expected, when reminded of the
event, you are likely to experience very strong emotions. Along with these feelings are physical
reactions. Indicators of arousal symptoms include problems falling or staying asleep, irritability
or outbursts of anger, difficulty concentrating, startle reactions like jumping at noises or if
someone walks up behind you, always feeling on guard or looking over your shoulder even when
there is no reason to. Which of these do you experience?...
"The third cluster of symptoms is avoidance of reminders of the event. A natural reaction to
intrusive reminders and strong emotional reactions is the urge to push these thoughts and
feelings away. You might avoid places or people who remind you of the event. Some people
avoid watching certain television programs or turn off the TV. Some people avoid reading the
newspaper or watching the news. You might avoid thinking about the event and letting yourself
5

Although avoidance is listed second in the DSM, it makes more sense to present the symptoms to patients in their
most likely order, intrusion, arousal, and avoidance. This way the explanation for the symptoms follows logically
from their description.

9
feel your feelings about the event. There might be certain sights, sounds, or smells that you find
yourself avoiding or escaping from because they remind you of the event. Sometimes people
have trouble remembering all or part of the event. Sometimes people feel numb and cut-off from
the world around them. This feeling of detachment or numbness is another form of avoidance.
Sometimes it is described as feeling as though you are watching life from behind glass. Which
things or thoughts do you avoid or run away from?... Have you felt numb or shut off from your
emotions?... Have you found yourself feeling disconnected from other people?
2. Trauma Recovery and Fight-Flight Response
“Many people are exposed to traumatic events. In the time immediately following a trauma,
most people will have the symptoms of PTSD that we just talked about. However, over time, for
many people, those symptoms naturally decrease, and they are not diagnosed with PTSD. In
other words, they naturally recover from the traumatic event. There are some people who do not
recover and are later diagnosed with PTSD. Based on that, it is helpful to think of PTSD as a
problem in recovery. Something got in the way of you having that natural process of recovery,
and our work together is to determine what got in the way and to change it so that you can
recover from what happened. We will be working to get you ‘unstuck’”.
There are some different reasons why you may be having trouble recovering. First, there
may be an automatic component during the event that you should consider as you evaluate how
you responded during the event. When people face serious, possibly life-threatening events, they
are likely to experience a very strong physical reaction called the fight-flight reaction. More
recently we have learned that there is a third possibility, the freeze response. In the fight-flight
reaction, your body is trying to get you ready to fight or flee danger. The goal here is to get all
the blood and oxygen out to your hands, feet, and big muscle groups like your thighs and
forearms so that you can run or fight. In order to do that quickly, the blood leaves your stomach
or your head. You might feel like you have been kicked in the gut or are going to faint. Your
body stops fighting off diseases and digesting food. You are not thinking about your philosophy
of life and may have trouble thinking at all. The same thing happens with the freeze response, but
in this case your body is trying to reduce both physical and emotional pain. You may have
stopped feeling pain or had the sense that the event was happening to someone else as if it were
a movie. You might have been completely shut down emotionally or even had shifts in
perception like you are out of your body or that time has slowed down.
If you have been thinking now of other things that you could have done then, you might
need to consider what your state of mind was during the event. Did you have all possible options
available to you? Did you know then what you know now? Do you have different skills now than
you did then?
Second, the fight-flight response that you were experiencing during the traumatic event can
get quickly paired with cues, or things in the environment, that didn’t have any particular
meaning before. Then later, when you encounter those cues, you are likely to have another fightflight reaction. Your nervous system senses the cue, which could be a sight, a sound, smell, or
even a time, and then your body reacts as though you are in danger again. These reactions will
fade over time if you don’t avoid those cues. However, if you avoid reminder cues, your body
won’t learn that these are not, in fact, good danger cues. They don’t tell you very accurately

10
whether you are actually in danger so you may have false alarms going off frequently. After a
while you won’t trust your own senses or judgment about what is and isn’t dangerous, and too
many situations seem dangerous that are not.
You may start to have thoughts about the dangerousness of the world, particular places,
or situations that are based on your reactions rather than the actual realistic danger of those
situations. This leads us to examine how your thoughts may affect your reactions. Besides
thoughts about dangerousness, many different types of beliefs about ourselves and the world can
be affected by traumatic events.
3.

Cognitive Theory
“As you were growing up you learned about the world and organized it into categories
or beliefs. For example, when you were small, you learned that a thing with a back, seat and
four legs is a chair. In the beginning you just called all of them 'chair'. You may have even
called a couch a chair or a stool a chair because they had a back, seat, and four legs. Later, as
you got older, through experience, you learned more complex categories, so you may have
learned dining room chair, rocking chair, recliner or folding chair. We develop many categories
of ideas and beliefs about others, the world, and ourselves, as well as for objects.
One common belief that many people get while growing up is that 'good things happen to
good people and bad things happen to bad people.' This is called the 'just world belief.' You
may have learned this through your religion, your parents, your teachers, or you may have
picked it up as a way to make the world seem safer and more predictable. It makes more sense
when you are young. For example, parents wouldn’t want to say, ‘If you do something you’re
not supposed to, you may or may not get in trouble.’ However, as we grow up, we realize that
the world is more complex than that, just like how we learn that there are all different types of
chairs. If you have ever had things go bad and you said 'Why me?,' then you have a just world
belief.
"When an unexpected event occurs that doesn't fit your beliefs, there are different ways that
you may try to make it fit. One way that you may have tried to make the event and your beliefs fit
is by changing your memories or interpretation of the event to fit with your pre-existing beliefs
(assimilation). Examples of changing your interpretations/memories of the event are to blame
yourself for not preventing the event (or protecting loved ones), to have trouble accepting that
the event happened, to 'forget' that it happened, or to forget the most horrifying parts. Changing
the event may seem easier than changing your entire set of beliefs about the world, how people
behave, or your beliefs about your safety.
"It is possible that instead of changing the event, you may change your beliefs to accept
what happened (accommodation). This is one of our goals for therapy. Unfortunately, some
people go overboard and change their beliefs too much, which may result in a reluctance to
become intimate or develop trust, and increased fear (over-accommodation). Examples that
reflect an extreme change in beliefs include: thinking that no one can be trusted or that the world
is completely dangerous.

11
“For some people who have had previous negative experiences in their life, traumatic
events can seem to reinforce or confirm these previously held beliefs. For example, prior to
having experienced a trauma you might have believed that others can’t be trusted or that the
world is generally unsafe. The traumatic event comes along and seems to confirm those beliefs.
Or, maybe you were told that everything was your fault growing up, so when a bad thing
happens, it seems to confirm that once again, you are at fault.
Our goals for therapy are: 1) to help you accept the reality of the event, 2) to feel your emotions
about it and 3) to help you develop balanced and realistic beliefs about the event, yourself, and
others.
4.

Types of Emotions
“There are two kinds of emotions that follow traumatic events. The first type is the feelings
that follow naturally from the event and that would be universal: fear when in real danger, anger
when being intentionally harmed, joy or happiness with positive events, or sadness with losses.
These natural emotions have a natural course. They will not continue on forever unless there is
something that you do to feed them. It is important to feel these emotions that you may not have
allowed yourself to experience about the event, and let them run their natural course.
The second type of emotions, manufactured feelings, result not directly in response to the
event, but based on how you interpret the event. If you have thoughts such as ‘I should have
rescued other people’ or ‘I must be a failure that I can’t get over it”, then you will be feeling
angry at yourself or shame. These emotions are not based on the facts of the event, but on your
interpretations. The more that you continue to think about the event in these ways, the more and
more of the manufactured feelings you are going to have. The upside of the fact that you are
producing these feelings is that, if you change your thoughts and interpretations, you will
change your feelings. Think of your emotions as a fire in a fireplace. The fire has energy to it.
However, it will burn out if it is not continually fed. The self-blame or guilty thoughts can
continue to feed the emotional fire indefinitely. Take away the fuel of your thoughts, and the fire
burns out quickly.
In order for you to recover from your traumatic event(s), we will be working together for
you to express and accept your natural emotions and to adjust the manufactured feelings.
Brief Review of Most Traumatic Event
In this first session, the therapist and patient work together to define the most traumatic
event that they will work on first. The patient then provides a brief account of the traumatic
event. It is important the therapist keep the patient contained and not conduct an exposure to the
traumatic material. Most veterans have a ‘public version’ of the incident that they can use that
does not elicit much affect. However, if the patient starts to become distressed or dissociates, the
therapist should ask questions and keep the patient grounded in the present. If needed, they can
stop the patient’s description. The therapist only needs enough of the details to begin to
hypothesize what problematic interpretations and cognitions might need to be explored.

12
We begin with the worst incident because there is more likely to be generalization of new,
more balanced cognitions from the worst event to less severe events than the other way around.
Also, if the patient begins with a less severe event because she believes she cannot handle the
worst event, she will still believe that after working on this event. If the patient is resistant to
writing an account about the worst event, the therapist needs to do some cognitive therapy during
session two and have the patient complete some A-B-C sheets on her thoughts and feelings about
working on the worst event (see sessions 2 and 3).
It is helpful to provide an expectation that the patient provide a brief, less affect-charged
event by providing a timeframe in the request.
“In order for me to have a clearer picture of what we will be working on first, could you
please give me a brief description, about five minutes, of the most traumatic event…”
If the patient responds that he has multiple traumatic events that disturb him, making it
difficult or impossible to choose the ‘most’ traumatic event, first validate the fact that he may
have multiple distressing events. Then, focus on ascertaining which one seems to be causing the
most PTSD symptoms by inquiring about the content of his reexperiencing symptoms. The
therapist can ask, ‘What do you think about or have flashbacks about the most?’ It may also be
helpful to probe about his behavioral avoidance symptoms to determine the event that should
addressed first. Remind the patient that work on the chosen event will very likely impact the
other events, and if not, there will be opportunities to work on the other events.
Therapy Rationale - Stuck Points
"So, one goal of therapy will be to help you recognize and modify what you are saying to
yourself-in other words, your thoughts and interpretations about the event, which may have
become automatic. These distorted beliefs may become so automatic that you aren't even aware
that you have them. Even though you may not be aware of what you are saying to yourself, your
beliefs and self-statements affect your mood and your behavior. Often, people aren't aware that
they are having thoughts about whatever they are experiencing. For example, on the way here
today, you were probably wondering what this therapy would be like or what I would be asking
you to talk about. Do you remember what you were thinking about before the session?...
"I will be helping you to identify what your automatic thoughts are and how they influence
what you feel. I will also teach you ways to challenge and change what you are saying to
yourself and what you believe about yourself and the event. Some of your beliefs about the event
will be more balanced than others. You remember that we discussed at the beginning of this
session about how some people get stuck in their recovery process. We will be focusing on
changing the beliefs that are interfering with your recovery or keeping you stuck. We call these
problematic beliefs ‘stuck points.’ (The patient is given the handout on stuck points and the
Stuck Point Log). We will keep a Stuck Point Log in your folder so as we identify problematic
ideas we can write them down. Then when we move to different worksheets you will have this list
to draw on.

13
Anticipating Avoidance and Increasing Compliance
The patient has been avoiding thinking about the event thereby escaping and avoiding strong
and unpleasant emotions. The therapist must develop a strong and compelling rationale for
therapy in order for the patient to be motivated to do something completely antithetical to what
they have been doing. It is very important that the patient understand what the therapy consists of
and why it will work. They should have ample opportunity to ask questions and express
concerns. The therapist needs to express confidence, warmth, and support.
I cannot emphasize enough how important it is that you not avoid, which is what you
usually have done to try to cope since the event. This will be your biggest (and probably
scariest) hurdle. I cannot help you feel your feelings, or challenge your thoughts if you don't
come to therapy or if you avoid completing your practice assignments. If you find yourself
wanting to avoid, remind yourself that you are still struggling with the event because you have
avoided dealing with it head-on.
The therapist should describe the course of therapy (and the nature of the trauma account in
sessions four and five) and the importance of doing practice assignments.
“There are 168 hours in a week. We cannot expect you to change your symptoms and the
way you have been coping in one or two hours a week if you are continuing to practice your old
ways of thinking the other 166 hours a week. It will be important for you to take what you are
learning and apply it to your everyday life. Your therapy needs to be where your life is, not just
in this little room”.
First Impact Statement
"For the next session, I want you to start working on how you think about and explain the
traumatic event. I also want you to pay attention to how the traumatic event impacted on your
views of yourself, other people, and the world. I want you to write at least one page on 1) why
this event happened to you, and 2) how has it changed or strengthened your views about
yourself, other people and the world in general?
In order for this assignment to be most helpful to you, I strongly suggest you try to start this
assignment soon, so that you have enough time to write thoughtfully. Pick a time and place
where you have as much privacy as possible, so you can feel any feelings that arise as you
complete the assignment.”
The patient is given a practice assignment sheet. If at all possible, the patient should handwrite
the Impact Statement. Some patients will want to type on the computer. Research suggests that
word processing can impede engagement with the assignment (e.g., too focused on grammar or
spelling). Therefore, encourage that this and other assignments be handwritten. It is often
helpful to remind them that you are not grading their work or interested in their grammar, etc.
Rather, you’re interested in the content and feelings. If the patient has problems with literacy or
physical disabilities that make it difficult or impossible to write, the therapist might suggest that
he record his thoughts into a tape recorder.

14

Practice assignment:
Please write at least one page on why this traumatic event occurred. You are not being asked to
write specifics about the traumatic event. Write about what you have been thinking about the
cause of the worst event. Also, consider the effects this traumatic event has had on your beliefs
about yourself, others, and the world in the following areas: safety, trust, power/control, esteem,
and intimacy. Bring this with you to the next session.
Also, please read over the handout I have given you on stuck points so that you understand the
concept we are talking about.

15
Traumatic Bereavement Session (Session 2 if applicable)
The goals for this session are to 1) determine the impact of the traumatic event on beliefs
about self and others, 2) begin to normalize the grief process and differentiate it from PTSD
symptoms, 3) identify stuck points that may interfere with the normal course of bereavement,
and 4) begin to assist the patient in viewing her relationship with the person who died as altered,
but not finished.
If this session is added, then the therapist will have the patient read the Impact Statement
first before turning to the topic of grief. Please see the regular session two, next, for comments
regarding avoidance and what to do if the patient did not complete the assignment. After
discussing the Impact Statement and identifying stuck points that are evident, the therapist will
begin an education portion on the topic of normal bereavement and will look for stuck points that
may interfere with normal grief reactions. To facilitate this process, some information is
provided below to assist the therapist to think about traumatic versus normal bereavement issues,
and to provide some education to the patient regarding the course of bereavement as varying and
multidimensional. It is important for the therapist to refrain from pathologizing the grief process
and to begin to differentiate grief from PTSD or depression.
Therapist overview: Traumatic bereavement
PTSD can interfere with the normal course of bereavement. It is also possible that
unresolved grief can further complicate recovery from PTSD. Although witnessing or being
injured during an event in which a loved one/friend was killed is more obviously associated with
PTSD, therapists need to consider a PTSD diagnosis among those who were not present at the
traumatic death of a loved one. In civilian life, the sudden, unexpected and perhaps violent death
of a significant other is so shocking, horrifying, and schema-discrepant that family and friends of
the victim may have trouble taking in the fact that the person has been killed. During war,
soldiers may accept the possibility that they or others may be killed, on an abstract level, but
losing friends, seeing children die, or having deaths occur in unexpected places (when one
thought he was safe), can also be shocking and hard to accept. Acceptance may be particularly
difficult for parents who lose children because of the expectation that their children will survive
them. And like other trauma survivors who actively avoid accepting the reality of the situation,
traumatic-death surviving family and friends may engage in self-blame as an attempt to undo the
event (e.g., “If only I hadn’t done X, he wouldn’t have been there at the time”). Unlike other
trauma victims, traumatic death survivors may believe that to accept the trauma and begin to
move on with their lives means they have betrayed the other person, that the other person isn’t
being properly honored.
Flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, and other intrusive reminders can recur even if someone
was not present at the death of their significant other. People may flash on or have strong
emotional or physiological reactions when reminded of being informed of the death. For
example, some people have strong reactions when the telephone or doorbell rings. They
immediately flash back to being told. Some people have strong reactions to temporal cues such
as a specific time of day, dusk, a certain month, or other anniversaries of the death. They may
react to climactic cues such as temperature, humidity, smells or other seasonal reminders.

16
Holidays or other personal days of celebration (birthdays, anniversaries) can be particularly
difficult and can trigger trauma cues (as well as positive memories).
It is not unusual for people to have images of or ruminate about (with accompanying
affect and physiological responses) what they imagine happened to their loved one/friend. Some
people feel compelled to put themselves into the shoes of the person who died in an attempt to be
closer with them. They try to imagine what the other person experienced, what they must have
been feeling or thinking, and wonder if they suffered or were in pain for a long time before they
died. These images can serve as intrusive reminders of PTSD (Criterion B).
Often with PTSD induced by traumatic bereavement, we do not see effortful avoidance
with regard to the person who died. To the contrary, some people intentionally ruminate and are
afraid to let go of the images, even very distressing images, because to let go is, in their minds, to
lose their loved one. Effortful avoidance is more likely to be of the trauma cues listed above.
Numbing is common.
When some people are killed during a traumatic event, those who survive, whether they
are friends, family, or strangers, may well have survivor guilt. When people experience
traumatic events, they often ask the question, “Why me?” because of their just world belief. A
corollary of this belief is asking “Why not me?” when surrounding others are killed. People with
survivor guilt feel that they do not have the right to go on when others are not, or believe that
they are less deserving of happiness (or even of living) than the person or people who died. They
try to determine why they survived and cannot find an acceptable explanation.
An issue that may need to be addressed with military and veteran populations is not just
witnessing or hearing about the death of someone the patient cared about, but also issues that
arise from having killed themselves. Soldiers may find themselves forced to engage in behavior
that is against their personal moral code, or in conflict with the circumstances under which they
believed that they would be killing others. In our experience, situations in which civilians, and
especially children, are killed are especially traumatic for veterans and servicemen (e.g., children
with backpack bombs, children put in front of transportation convoys). Grieving and
assumptions about one’s actions during war can be very complicated because of the nature of
war itself. Veterans and military personnel may blame themselves, the combatants, the
government that put them in the position they found themselves, or the behavior and perceived
failures of command or fellow soldiers. The combination of anger and guilt can complicate and
prolong the grief response.
The goal of CPT for bereavement is to help patients determine and eliminate any stuck
points, problematic cognitions that are blocking their recovery, and to help them eventually focus
on the person’s life, not just the way in which he or she died.
First the therapist can start with bereavement issues…
“Prior to this death, what has been your experience with the death of loved ones?”

17
If the patient has never experienced the death of a loved one, then ask “What were your
expectations about death of loved ones? Had you ever thought about it? Or was it a topic that
you avoided thinking about?”
Once the therapist understands what the patient understood about death and the grief
process prior to the traumatic death, s/he can then ask..
“How is this situation different than what you had experienced before (or imagined)?”
“What have other people been telling you about grief and mourning?
“What suggestions have people been making?”
Give the patient(s) the Myths of Mourning handout. Discuss each of the statements with
the patient to determine which, if any, statements the patient has been subscribing. Along with
debunking some common myths, the therapist uses this session to help the patient understand the
normal process of bereavement, to see how the traumatic bereavement relates to symptoms of
PTSD, and to begin to identify distorted cognitions, conflicts between prior beliefs and the
traumatic event.
Education on Normal Bereavement
Bereavement affects different aspects of one’s life. People have emotional, spiritual, and
physical reactions. They also have to adjust their roles with regard to other people, the
community more generally, and with regard to tasks and behaviors. While some grief reactions
may feel like and share some characteristics with other psychological reactions such as
depression, it is important for the therapist not to pathologize grief. Bereavement is not the result
of personality traits, but is the normal and time-limited reaction to loss. Mourning is not the same
as depression and does not respond to anti-depressants.
In the past it was possible to tell that someone was grieving for a period of time because
of clothing indicative of mourning and institutionalized rules about mourning such as wearing
black for a year, wearing certain jewelry or armbands, limiting social engagements and so forth.
These practices provided more community support because the person who was grieving was
clearly identifiable and there was an expectation that bereavement should take an extended
period of time. On the other hand, the rigid rules about length of mourning were not flexible
enough to accommodate different patterns of grief. Some people may not have needed a year in
order to begin to reestablish their lives (some may have needed longer). In modern times, there is
no way to identify whether someone is in mourning, so the community quickly returns to usual
routines and expects the bereaved person to do so as well. While community support is often
very active initially, people often return to their own lives after a few months, leaving the
bereaved adrift to adjust to their changes in roles and tasks. After a few months grieving people
may start receiving comments by others that they should move on with their lives and to put the
traumatic event and the loved one behind them (people with PTSD hear this all the time even
without a traumatic death). People may need assistance in tolerating the predominant community
standards that do not reflect the reality of the mourning timeline for them.
In the early stages of bereavement, people need information and support in coping
emotionally. Later, if the person who died is a family member, they need to focus more on

18
instrumental tasks. Some tasks, like dealing with insurance companies and changing names on
titles are directly due to the death of the family member. Other tasks represent a realignment of
typical chores (e.g., now the patient needs to pay bills or cook, when before the other partner
took responsibility for those tasks). Each of these instrumental adjustments, if successfully
negotiated, will help the bereaved person accept the reality of the situation and assist in a greater
sense of control. As the tasks and roles are realigned, then the person also moves to reconnect
with his community, reestablish and adjust relationships with their friends and relatives and
finally to rebuild his assumptive world. This latter task includes adjusting his beliefs about
himself and the world, with regard to the loved one’s death. As elsewhere in CPT, the therapist
is looking for accommodation rather than assimilation or over-accommodation, balance in beliefs
rather than extreme statements.
Sometimes the bereavement process for military personnel becomes more acute once
they leave the military. While in the military, other people in that environment may have been
able to provide support and understanding of the losses that a soldier experienced. Upon
returning to the civilian world, however, people in the environment may not be able to
understand or appreciate the loss of comrades, or may even be unsympathetic because of
different viewpoints on the war. Although our society appears to be doing a better job separating
the war from the warrior in the recent OEF/OIF conflict, this is not universally true and there are
many Vietnam veterans who carry the scars of verbal abuse upon returning to the US after their
tours of duty in Vietnam. They may not have been given the opportunity to grieve the loss of
their friends and fellow soldiers or may be stuck in a cycle of grieving that has not remitted.
The following are excerpts from a bereavement Impact Statement. The statement was
four hand-written pages. It illustrates the effects the murder of a granddaughter had on a patient.
I think at first I needed to be strong from my son. As long as I could do that, I did not
have to face the finality of death. This is still so hard for me to say. To think of ______ in the past
tense still causes me to have a panicky feeling. I cannot describe how much I love her or how
much I miss her.
I thought I would always be the same me. But now I realize I will never be the same. At
first I kept trying to be the same self- Tried so hard that I would get these panic attacks, so I just
tried not to think about it.
I feel like this big cloud has settled over me and sometimes it suffocates me. I would like
to just pull the covers over my head and not take them off for a long time. But I know I can’t,
especially for my son. He says he would like to go into a closet and not come out.
I talked today with my Pastor about my feelings, how I feel so frozen inside, that I cannot
pray and do not feel spiritual at all. It makes me feel so empty. I miss the fellowship I had with
my God. I do want to have that again.
Some people say I need to try to forgive – I can’t and I don’t want to – at least not now…
I really don’t want to be angry – this is not me. But right now I’m so angry.
While the example above illustrates assimilation through non-acceptance and avoidance,
the next excerpts from a different patient whose friend was killed and illustrates both
assimilation and over-accommodation.

19
I always believed that I could protect ______ from anything or anyone. I feel like a
failure. I failed him. I should have been watching his back then no one would have been able to
shoot him in his back. I could have administered CPR and helped to breathe in him the breath of
life. He would have calmed down and fought harder if I had been there… Who knew? But I failed
him and I don’t have any other chance to make it up to him.
This world is a cruel world where no one seems to care about anyone outside of their
own family… I trust no one outside of the family and I really am no longer close to my family. I
no longer use the word “friend” because it no longer serves a purpose in my life. I feel
abandoned by certain people in my family. They are already ready for me to move on. Isn’t that
crazy?!
It may be helpful for a patient to realize that his relationship with the deceased has
changed rather than ended. The patient can still have a relationship with the deceased even
though the relationship is not reciprocal. As part of the Impact Statement on the death of the
significant other, the patient is asked, “How has the event affected your relationship with the
deceased?”
One of the problems that can occur early in the grieving process (and stall out in some
cases) is the tendency to over-idealize the person who has died. It is difficult for the bereaved
person to move on, reestablish connections with others, and alter her relationship with the
deceased if the person who died is not the person who lived before. The loved ones may
experience more survivor guilt or hindsight bias if they believe that the person who died was
perfect or that it is bad/wrong to remember any flaws or foibles. The therapist needs to tread
lightly on this topic, perhaps pursuing it later in therapy, although it can be broached gently at
this time. The therapist, in hearing an over-idealized description of the deceased can say:
“He sounds like an angel. I’d like to have a better picture of the whole man that you
knew. Tell me a little about his eccentricities or habits”.
The goal here is to help the patient to grieve for the person who really lived with an
integrated and balanced view.
In some cases, over-idealization may be a particular problem because the idealized image
of the deceased is embraced by a whole community. In the aftermath of the World Trade Center
attack, firefighters, police, and other rescue workers who died have been rightly hailed as heroes.
Heroes are people who risk themselves to help others in spite of their fear or flaws, not because
they were fearless and flawless. It may be particularly difficult for family members if their
memories of the person clash with the public image. If a couple was having marital problems, or
the partner was having an extra-marital affair, was abusive, or alcoholic, the surviving partner
would not know how to reconcile this information with the accolades and images of the partner
as a saint. Even to remember small flaws would seem like a betrayal of the person who died.
And yet, the surviving partner and family members have these memories as well and struggle to
deal with them. Some people attempt to suppress or ignore inconsistent information. If they are
successful in avoiding, there is a greater likelihood of more prolonged bereavement than for
those who can put the person’s life into an accurate perspective.

20
Pertinent to situations like the attack on September 11, 2001, and war, is the issue in
which the body of the deceased is never found. It may be more difficult in these cases for the
surviving family and friends to accept that the person is actually dead. When there is no concrete
proof that the person died, assimilation and denial are more likely. The survivors may have
continuing fantasies that there has been some mistake, that the loved one has been wandering
around with amnesia or injured and unable to contact them. They may have extended periods
during which acceptance of the reality of the situation is postponed.
Finally, when a group of people experience the same event and then support each other in
the aftermath, they can help each other progress through the various stages of grief. However,
there are two risks. One is that the members of the group will be recovering at different rates,
leading to misunderstandings or some people being held back from their natural rate. A worse
outcome is that the group becomes stuck together and stop recovering altogether. They develop
an us-against-them mentality in which they come to believe that no one can understand what
they have experienced and that they can never recover. If someone who seeks therapy 