Giamblanco 1
Nicholas V. Giamblanco
ENG503 - Science Fiction
Professor David Copeland
Monday, November 21st, 2016
New Crobuzon - The Mirror to Our World
Question No. 1
Science Fiction has more substance than space ships, alien interactions and other intergalactic
experiences. This genre provides a connection to science, society and morality, through fiction.
Science Fiction is the bridging and extrapolation between reality and an alternate world where
science is the catalyst for open-ended ethical and moral questions. These questions are significant
to our society, as we citizens often neglect our reflective duties. Our world contains many ethical
and moral issues, but many of these issues are suppressed by our ignorance and our lack of
responsibility. Walking by the homeless, purchasing clothing to feel good, polluting the environment,
consuming an abnormal amount of food while people starve; these are examples of our ignorance
and irresponsibility. These problems must be addressed and investigated in order to create a solution.
By using Science Fiction, we grasp the attention of society and can ask significant questions to
highlight problems our society ignores. Perdido Street Station written by China Mieville ´ , provides
a connection to our world through the fictional city of New Crobuzon. This connection not only
introduces science fiction’s dependency on this city, but its exploration provides an obscure lens to
our world’s issues. The city’s noir description, its underlying corruption and lies, and the cultural
differences between Issac and Lin provide this relationship to our world’s issues.
Visual descriptions of a physical environment provide information about the environment’s
appearance, inhabitants, and the emotional atmosphere. In literature, these elements combine to
form a relationship with a theme. In Perdido Street Station the noir element of our world is explored
and mirrored in New Crobuzon. The description of this city’s entrance, the exploration of the
innards of this city, and the description of the city’s architecture reflect the noir nature of society.
This steam-punk novel begins the story with a passenger on a boat, entering an ominous area. The
Giamblanco 2
passenger begins his tale by describing the location of the boat, and the body of water it’s traveling
on. The boat is traveling on a river that ”...twists and turns to face the city. It looms suddenly,
massive, stamped on the landscape,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 4). The author’s thought was to indicate ´
the prominence of the city, and how it is not avoidable. Just as any traveler approaches any city
through means of air travel, boating journeys, or driving, a big city cannot be missed. As the
journey progresses, the passenger begins to describe details of the city, ”Its lights wells up around
the surrounds, the rock hills, like bruise-blood,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 4) and ”Its ´ dirty towers glow. I
am debased,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 4). The description of the entrance into New Crobuzon provides an ´
emotional atmosphere with sensations involved in debasement, disgust, and dirtiness. The author is
explicit, direct and grim with the introduction to the city, ”New Crobuzon was a huge plague pit,
a morbific city,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 9). ´ Mieville ´ is opening up our eyes to the truth of our world,
how dirty, and disgusting it really is. As the novel progresses, Lin is introduced. She is one of
the main characters of Perdido Street Station. She is a Khepri (a humanoid insect, similar to a
beetle). One of Lin’s distinct emotional characteristics is her dislike for her culture. This dislike
drives her to leave her sanction, and change her lifestyle. Lin is an artist, but maintains practices
that are unconventional for her cultural standards of art. Lin’s interesting personality allows for
an in-depth exploration into the innards of New Crobuzon. In Chapter 2, Lin makes her way into
the heart of this grim city. She begins her passage into the core of the city with clogs wet with
”... organic muck from the street, rich pickings for the furtive creatures peering from the drain.”
(Mieville, 2001, p. 13). Once again, Mi ´ eville reinforces the the city’s dirtiness and griminess, in ´
hopes of grabbing the reader’s attention for comparison to our world. Lin continues her journey
in a cab. Dark imagery is presented during this ride, of the Flyside Militia Tower, with its ”...
vast filthy pudgy pillar, squat and mean, somehow, for all it thirty-five storeys,”(Mieville, 2001, p. ´
14) and of the half inflated dirigible, ”...It flapped and lolled and swelled like a dying fish. She
could feel its engine humming, even through the layers of air, as it stained to disappear into the
gun-grey clouds.”(Mieville, 2001, p. 14). The intensity of the descriptive elements increase as her ´
journey continues, until she reaches the, ”architectural tissue where the fibres of the city congealed,
Giamblanco 3
where the skyrails of the militia radiated out from the Spike like a web ... Perdido Street Station,”
(Mieville, 2001, p. 16). The emphasis of darkness, dirtiness, and debasement in New Crobuzon ´
provoke the reader to reflect upon the world we currently live in. The city’s architecture supports
this negative intensity the author is conveying to the reader, ”The rotting buildings lean against
each other, exhausted,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 4). Furthermore, the architecture represents the cold ´
and unfulfilled emotions surrounding this city, ”Extra Storeys are rendered in the cold white muck
which fills gaps between houses and dead-end alleys,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 5). The beginning of ´
chapter six continues this noir journey, ”Even the trains that moved innumerable women and men
and commodities around New Crobuzon’s great carcuss fought to stay about the houses, as if they
were afraid of the putrefaction of architecture,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 39). The imagery surrounding ´
the rotting, decaying, dirty city was intended by the author to convey a reflection of our world. This
reflection was emphasized through the grim introduction of New Crobuzon, the exploration of the
city’s innards, and the architectural pieces within the city.
The act of lying, is to declare ”An intentionally false statement,”(Oxford University Press, n.d.).
As a society, humans frown upon individuals that lie. However, the act of lying is ubiquitous in our
society. Intentionally false statements can be used to deceive a target, where the target may be a
computing system or a society. A computer hacker can deceive and gain access to the computing
system. A society can be deceived by a presidential candidate who lies to the public and manages to
win the presidential election. Once the target system is deceived, corruption can ensue. The hacked
computing system is subject to file corruption, data corruption, etc. The deceived society is subject
to war, segregation, poverty, abuse, and corruption. Perdido Street Station’s city of New Crobuzon
mirrors these elements of lies, deceit, and corruption through the characters of Yagharek, Bentham
Rudgutter, and Mr. Motley. The character Yagharek, is one to investigate for characteristics of
deceit. His introduction is abrupt, ”... the door swung open and shut again below,”(Mieville, 2001, p. ´
20). This is where Issac - one of the main characters of the story - is introduced to Yagharek. Issac
is a scientist known in New Crobuzon for his controversial research. Yagharek is a member of the
Garuda species, (a species that closely resembles birds). This Garuda contacted Issac in hopes of
Giamblanco 4
reviving Yagharek’s wings, which, ”...Issac realized that the wings had been sawed from Yagharek’s
back. No single sudden cut, but a long, drawn out torturous cut.” (Mieville, 2001, p. 31). Curiously, ´
Issac probed Yagharek, in order to find out what had happened to Yagharek. Issac discovers that this
occurred due to a ”..choice theft in the second degree... with utter disrespect,” and is kept in the dark
about its meaning.(Mieville, 2001, p. 32). The authors intention for this vague response becomes ´
clear near the end of the novel. Issac agrees to help Yagharek to revitalize his wings. However,
Issac was deceived by Yagharek. Yagharek had raped a member of his species. This was choice
theft in the second degree. Yagharek’s choice to be elusive with details regarding this punishment
is a clear example of deceit. Mieville’s involvement of Yagharek’s deceit provides the plot of the ´
novel, but it also reveals other underlying corruption within New Crobuzon. The mayor, Bentham
Rudgutter, proves to be a source of corruption in Perdido Street Station. Rudgutter has ”got fingers
in every fucking pie you can think of,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 81). The mayor of New Crobuzon has ´
been involved in many illicit acts, including his government personnel. They all, ”Churn out the
commodity, grab the profit, get the militia to tidy up your customers afterwards, get a new crop
of Remade or slave-miners,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 81). By adding corruption in a governmental ´
figure, Mieville provides the comparison to our corporate sector, and the elements that drives these ´
corporate giants - lies, deceit and corruption. The mayor’s illicit activities include bargaining with
demons, ”We haven’t even discussed yet, Ambassador. I assure you I can make a very generous
offer,” (Mieville, 2001, p. 161). By bargaining with the demon ambassador, Rudgutter proves his ´
corrupt nature; Demons are the symbol of evil. The mayor is also involved with crime related gangs,
”What by damn, what in Jabber’s name, what the godshit was Motley playing at? I thought the man
was supposed to be professional...,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 156). Finally, Rudgutter has affliations with ´
Mr. Motley, the most feared ganglord in the city and is equally deceitful and corrupt. Mr. Motley’s
appearance provides an allusion to the theme of corruption, deceit and lies, ”Scraps of skin and fur
and feathers swung as he moved; tiny limbs clutched; eyes rolled from obscure niches; antlers and
protrusions of bone jutted precariously,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 28). The description of Mr. Motley is ´
the imagery of corruption. His body is a random and awkward synthesis, providing the comparison
Giamblanco 5
to our obsession with material goods. The author has chosen to represent our desire for material
goods with this character to explain how materialists are corrupt. Mr. Motley’s character provides
more on this theme of corruption, as we see his role in the city of New Crobuzon, ”He talked idly
of turf wars in Griss Twist and Badside, dropped hints of gangland massacres in the heart of The
Crow,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 120). The author is establishing Mr. Motley’s power in New Crobuzon. ´
The power Mr. Motley has affects Lin during their sessions together. Through repetition of his
corrupt plans, ”Mr. Motley’s blithe chat crept in,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 120) to Lin’s mind. This ´
distorts her thoughts, as she found herself, ”idly wondering,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 120) and concerned ´
about these plans. Mieville is ensuring Mr. Motley be treated as a corrupt computer program, which ´
creates corruption in any memory space it is connected to. In this case, Mr. Motley is corrupting the
city of New Crobuzon, the Mayor of this Dystopian city, and Lin.
Culture is essential to any society. Culture, is ”the beliefs, customs, arts, etc., of a particular
society, group, place, or time” (Merriam-Webster, 2016). Some cities in the modern world consist of
an infusion of different cultures. New Crobuzon hosts a wide variety of cultures: Cactace, Remades,
Vodyanoi, Khepri, and many others. With these cultural salads, it is important to investigate
their relationships. Cultural mixing may pose issues in romance, lifestyle, and society. This
city in Perdido Street Station, poses questions about multicultural relationships. Issac and Lin’s
multicultural relationship is explored for its differences and similarities from a multicultural view,
and its reflection to our world. Initially, Perdido Street Station introduces New Crobuzon through
a human, Issac. By viewing New Crobuzon through Issac’s eyes in chapter one, cultural traits of
humans are presented. Dreaming is an innate trait to humans. The introduction to Issac is brought
about by living through one of his dreams. This dream in particular is a nightmare, where Issac was,
”staring anxiously at the class when that unctuous bastard Vermishank had looked in,”(Mieville, ´
2001, p. 8). The dreaming mechanism is presented to provide a recognizable feeling, ensuring the
reader feels connected. The specific use of a nightmare is important as it unveils human qualities of
fear, misery, and loathing. Issac feels misery, as he failed as a teacher, while working at a university.
Issac is also sensitive to external judgment. His sensitivity is brought about when Lin signs, ”You
Giamblanco 6
hide us so you can publish articles for people you despise,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 12) in regards to ´
his failure in the academic world. Issac responds with a defensive comment, wondering how Lin
would feel ”if the art-world threatened to ostracize her,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 12). This is a typical ´
human characteristic. Mieville demonstrates these human characteristics with Issac in order to ´
provide a familiarity to our world. Issac is our common ground in New Crobuzon. The Khepri
culture is introduced within the second chapter of this novel, through the use of Lin. Lin is the key
to understanding this culture. She is able to provide this view as she is an outsider to her culture,
”She breathed easier when the streets around her were clean of beetle cement, and the only Khepri
in the crowds were, like here, outcasts,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 16). By being an outsider to the culture, ´
Lin can identify many qualities of the Khepri: ”You have nothing, surrounded by people that mock
you as bugs, buy your art cheap, and sell you food dear, but because there are others with even
less you style yourselves the protectors of the Khepri way. I’m out. I dress how I like. My art is
mine,”(Mieville, 2001, p. 16). The Khepri culture is comparable to a boxed-in religious community, ´
where no external thinking is required - just follow blindly with no questions. The author ensures
the reader is aware of this, ”Lin’s broodma (who scorned a name as decadent affection) taught Lin
and her broodsister that Insect Aspect was the lord of all creation... He had shat out the universe
after eating the void, in a mindless act of cosmic creation... they were also taught to worship
and serve their mindless brothers”(Mieville, 2001, p. 123). By creating a religious dimension in ´
which a culture is closed off to new ideas, the author has created a link to our world’s cultures and
their beliefs. Lin’s dislike for her culture reinforces this idea, as many individuals in our world do
not support such a one-sided view on life. Lin’s dislike for the ”Khepri Way” creates a want for
reintegration into another culture. Lin has, ”steeped herself enough in human culture,”(Mieville, ´
2001, p. 83) to become like a human. This want allows the reader to connect to Lin, as it is
common for individuals of different cultures to change their beliefs, customs, and rituals to fit into
another culture. Although her species is alien to us, Mieville has added human characteristics to the ´
Khepri for us to compare with foreign cultures in our world. These differences and similarities in
Khepri and Humans are explored, through Issac and Lin’s relationship. This cultural relationship is
Giamblanco 7
introduced in the initial chapters of this novel. In certain areas of the city, the couple must hide their
status, ”Issac and Lin had been lovers nearly two years. They had always tried not to think too hard
about the rules of their relationship... Innocent remarks and askance looks from others, a moment
of contact too long in a public-a note from a grocer-was a reminder that they were,in some contexts,
living a secret”(Mieville, 2001, p. 10). The author is allowing the reader to relate to instances in our ´
world of forbidden love. Even differences in physical characteristics demonstrate awkwardness, ”I
see clearly as you, clearer. For you it is undifferentiated. In one corner a slum collapsing, in another
a new train with pistons shining... For me each tiny part has integrity, each fractionally different
from the next, until all variation is accounted for, incrementally, rationally”(Mieville, 2001, p. 13). ´
This awkwardness is presented to the reader to highlight differences in culture. These slight cultural
differences reflect to our world, where couples of different cultures experience many awkward and
unusual adjustments. The author presents the reader with this relationship as it reflects upon the
cultural differences in our world, and how it affects relationships in a personal and romantic way.
Couples of different cultures often abide by foreign rules and traditions that over complicate their
relationship. By exploring these different cultures, and their intermingling, a connection to our
world is established, and the reader is able to understand issues regarding multiculturalism.
It is absolutely imperative for society to reflect upon its current state, status, and condition. By
reflecting on our society, it is possible for positive and healthy growth in all subjects and interests.
Unfortunately, the frequency of this self-reflection does not meet the requirements for this growth.
Perdido Street Station explores this deficiency, and uses Science Fiction as a mirror to our world.
New Crobuzon temporarily replaces our world through an abstract and obscure lens. Issues that
reflect politics, society, and morality are targeted with this city. New Crobuzon explores the darkness
of reality, lies, deceit, and corruption, the cultural infusion of Lin and Issac’s relationship and its
relationship to our world. Ultimately, the Science Fiction in Perdido Street Station is this obscure,
bizarre magnifying glass, which enlarges issues in our world through the dystopic city of New
Crobuzon.
