Jovan Arsovski
500563162
PHL214
November 24th, 2016

Analysis on Chris Johnston article on “Uber drivers win key employment case”
Johnston, (2016) in his article summarizes that Uber driver are now classified as workers as opposed to being self-employed, determined by a London Employment Tribunal where it was ruled that uber drivers were entitled to paid rest breaks, holiday pays and the national minimum wage (Conclusion of the argument). The argument is by supported by analyzing the implications of the ruling and addresses the two different points of view, those who are happy with the results, and who are not happy. Focusing on the support of the results, the premises are that 2 specific drivers, James Farrar and Yaseen Aslam, believed that their actions were controlled by Uber, in which meant they were employed by the firm, and not “self-employed”. Furthermore, it is argued that the workers are not making enough money, as well as not supplied with the “tools” to achieve their job, such as a car. Lastly, General Secretary Frances O'Grady states “For many workers the gig economy is a rigged economy, where bosses can get out of paying the minimum wage and providing basics like paid holidays and rest breaks.” (Johnson). 
Each premise is not sufficient enough to support the conclusion alone, however there are a few premises that together make a case, however they are weak and will be proven such. As mentioned, the author mainly focused on extreme quotes by other individuals on why the win on the employment case is important, as an appeal to authority. Hence, it even appeals to emotion as it mentions no breaks or holidays for the worker, where it is a fact that being an uber driver is a freelance job, where breaks are created by yourself. Furthermore, the case examples used in the study are not generalizations and they are few sample to prove different points on uber drivers. The case study is primarily based on two uber drivers and not the whole uber company. Even though the two worker may have had harsh conditions, and believe they aren’t self-employed because their current working state matches the criteria of being “employed”, doesn’t solely support the conclusion, as the article even mentions that vast majority of workers believe and are, in fact their own bosses. The possible fallacy observed is the common cause and effect, such that if the workers aren’t making enough money, aren’t given tools and resources, then the company is the cause of restrictions, which is quite irrelevant when the company is based of freelance workers. To conclude, the argument is adequate, as it follows a V argument, however each premise is weak due to the fact that it’s based on specific concepts, and doesn’t justify the conclusion which applies to the vast majority of Uber drivers. 
Analysis on Michael Gonchar “Are the Web Filters at Your School Too Restrictive”
Gonchar (2016) explores the student’s opinion whether the web filters at school are often too restrictive.  The argument’s conclusion is that web filters at school are inefficient. Furthermore, the article uses the words creepy, suffocating, stupid, ridiculous and absurd, to describe the web filters, in an attempt to persuade young readers to accept the conclusion, as the argument is based on a younger sample demographic.
The premises used for the conclusion are student’s opinions and reasoning’s as to why web filters are inefficient. For instance, one student believes because he couldn’t access information on a video game he was researching, he had to switch his topic and not research what he wanted. Another student believes her essay took twice as long to finish because she couldn’t access sites on Planned Parenthood and birth control. These premises, all fall under the fallacy of Post Hoc, that since the research couldn’t be achieved quickly, and properly, it’s the web filters fault since that’s what limits some part of the web. However, these web filters are regulated by the requirements of the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA), and even though there may be a correlation between research efficiency and web filters, they are in place for a reason, and research is still achievable by many other means. Thus, the author summarizes most of the points on the “bad reputation” of web restriction than rather also point out the main arguments by using points which don’t agree with the research he has provided. The argument is opinioned based, therefore it relies on perception and appeal, as the students proclaim that they cannot learn about planned pregnancy, as well as sexual abuse because of blocked “key words”. This now targets an older demographic, as adults would be more perceived to allow children to learn about possible future dangers, but it doesn’t take into account religious factors, and school laws in place. Generally, the arguments mainly focuses on an appeal to emotion, and to make the argument more logically stronger, the author may decide to incorporate facts, or truth statements.  
Analysis on Christopher Clarey article on “Soccer Without Headers? New Research Shows It’s Worth Discussing” 
 Clarey (2016) states that the conclusion of the article is that it is worth to stop playing soccer without headers as they will cause brain injury. The fallacy utilized in this argument is of the Post Hoc, as the writer makes points which assume that because headers involve hitting the ball with your head, then this should cause injury. The author has a dense collection of premises that support his conclusion, ranging from factual research, to personal experience. Thus, the facts make up one general premise, his personal experience make another premise, and together they propose that there is correlation from soccer to brain damage, supporting the conclusion that soccer should be played without headers. 





Firstly, the author has research that there is reductions in memory test performance when tested in a controlled environment of constant heading the ball. Other research also make correlation to concussions and headering the ball, and the dangers of the sport. However, it fails to recognize that soccer is a sport played by feet, and these incidents when the head must be used, aren’t regular and don’t constitute the whole game. Furthermore, people participating in the sport know that the sport uses the head, they are well aware of the action. The author relies on scientists, rather than actual soccer players to support his argument, who are the ones that if change is to be made, they should be the one voicing an opinion. Generally, the author just states the potential impacts, but doesn’t fully support the conclusion. Furthermore, the author relays his premise of personal experience and his coaching of young children. The fact that it was banned on the use of children below 12 or 11 years, is not conclusive enough to rule other causes. The author appeal to emotion as it tried to draw a correlation to long-term health hazard, as the beloved sport viewed as “safe haven by American families” (Clarey), may now be dangerous. These premises, together support the idea that headers have a correlation to brain damage, and for that reason soccer should be played without headers. The missing premise is opinion or statement from a current soccer player, or someone who got brain damage from soccer, as the change to the game will affect them the most. As a third perspective, the topic can be viewed and analyzed many different ways, however changing the way the game is played shouldn’t be done due to possible dangers of its nature. 










Works cited
Clarey, Christopher. “Soccer Without Headers? New Research Shows It’s Worth Discussing.” New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/29/sports/soccer/soccer-without-headers-new-research-shows-its-worth-discussing.html?rref=collection%2Fsectioncollection%2Fsoccer. Accessed on Wed. 23 Nov. 2016
Gonchar, Michael. “Are the Web Filters at Your School Too Restrictive?” New York Time. http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/27/learning/are-the-web-filters-at-your-school-too-restrictive.html?_r=0. Accessed on Web. 23 Nov. 2016.
Johnston, Chris. "Uber Drivers Win Key Employment Case." BBC News. 
http://www.bbc.com/news/business-37802386. Accessed on Web. 23 Nov. 2016.

