




ENG 610 ESSAY:
VOYEURISM IN “A SHORT FILM ABOUT LOVE” 

Monika Cibulskis















	In “A Short Film About Love” by Kieslowski, the lines of what is considered a voyeur become quite blurred. The viewer eventually finds themselves questioning who truly has access to agency through the role of the voyeur and their victim. The story begins in a typical male voyeur, female victim setting, but soon sweeps you into the confines of a tragic love story, leaving you wondering whether the confines our society sets on gender allow us to express love truly. Through this, the audience can infer that Kieslowski is criticizing these roles. Kieslowski's “A Short Film About Love” demonstrates a social critique upon the role of the voyeur through taking the use of gendered stereotypes and re-framing these ideas. This social critique can be examined through an analysis of Tomek's characteristics as the voyeur, the role of Magda being viewed and then the reversal which follows. 

	Society has forced a stereotype of the “voyeur” onto the male role, attaching it to characteristics of masculinity. A man, asserting his dominance and active role, is generally always assumed to be the sexual predator, the one objectifying, the one with the gaze, as the female is passively watched. Reading studies on human sexuality, deviances such as voyeurism, are seen to be reported and researched more into the male subject. In “Psychology of Human Sexuality”, it reports on statistics and studies on men being treated for voyeurism, while the idea of a female voyeur isn't even mentioned, although it surely does exist (Lehmiller, 2013). This is how the idea is portrayed through all sorts of media, as Mulvey explains, “the determining male gaze projects its fantasy onto the female figure” (Mulvey, 2009). Tomek's character is at the age of nineteen, generally seen as a time where men seem to embrace these sorts of innocent and socially-accepted forms of voyeurism, such as porn, strip clubs and reality television. He lives a fairly sheltered life, but there is scenes of his grandmother asking him to watch Miss Poland with her, a seemingly innocent form of voyeurism, in which she does not realize could be affecting Tomek's sexual deviances further. Tomek is seen to be struggling with his idea of what masculinity is. You can see this trial in his moments of anger, punching into his dresser when he becomes upset with himself for calling the gas company, to interrupt a night with Magda's lover. He believes, through these reinforced social and media ideas, that he should enjoy watching her have sex, objectifying her, but struggles with the idea of lust versus love. You can see this idea of Tomek not being a “man” being portrayed in the movie, in the way that he wheels his milk carton around in circles, happiness radiating from him because he has finally received some genuine human connection and attention from Magda. He is portrayed in a whimsical, childish way, playing in the court yard like a school boy, dictating that his need for attention is not of a masculine nature. When Tomek finally gets the chance to be with Magda in a sexual manner, he overexcites at the possibility, humiliated, he runs away and later ends up in the hospital. This is where we see the switch happen, Tomek's socially reinforced ideas of masculinity ripped away from his hands, as he is unable to perform in the dominant manner that a man is raised believing he should. He may have tried to take the active role, claiming his agency and asking Magda on a date, but perhaps the pressure to meet these conventions was too high, and he hated himself for being unable to reach the standard. 

	Magda, on the other hand, throughout the first part of the movie, until the switch is occured, is painted as a passive victim. As Mulvey describes, “she holds the look, and plays to and signifies male desire” (Mulvey, 2009). This is shown thoroughly as Magda, in certain scenes, almost seems as though she is putting on some sort of show, presenting her sexuality, through her lack of clothing as she goes about her house, the constantly drawn curtains, the string of overnight guests she brings over. In a certain scene, when she becomes suspicious of him, she moves her bed to face the window, to put on a show for her voyeur. In this sense, not only is Tomek objectifying her, but she is allowing this objectification upon herself, turning herself purely into an item of physical attraction and sexuality. She seems to get a certain erotic thrill in knowing that he is watching, as many women are portrayed in movies and porn, getting off on fulfilling men's desires. In this sense, she is just as socially coded as Tomek is with his masculinity. She has fallen into the norms of what femininity is represented as, passive and providing pleasure for the male eye. A scene that completely reinforces this concept is when Tomek and Magda are on their date and she discovers all the things that would typically be considered “harassment” that he is doing to her, such as stealing her mail and such. Instead of being in an outrage, which would be the analytically correct response, she asks for him to caress her hand, as though impressed that he has taken such firm action to get what he wants from her. She rewards him for this stereotypical, take charge “masculine” behaviour, by flaunting her stereotypical “feminine” sexuality, thus proving the whole gendered stereotypes of the voyeur to be true. 

	The social commentary that Kieslowski is trying to make on the idea of gendered voyeurism is finally brought to light in the reversal of the characters, following the moment Tomek runs away in shame. As for the masculine voyeur role, Kieslowski comments that the expectation of young men to fulfill this idea of masculinity is very damaging to men. As the whole “men don't cry” or “men don't express heightened emotions” stereotype that is depicted through countless documentaries such as “Do I sound Gay?” by David Thorpe, and “The Mask You live in” by Jennifer Siebel Newson, this movie brings to light concepts discussed within these. As Martin explains in an analysis of gendered sexuality, our entire cultural society and the way we view sexuality, from the act of the egg and the sperm to how we theorize sex, is gendered (Martin, 1991). Therefore, taking into account a man such as Tomek, a voyeur who is scared to engage, but seeks a human connection, rather than over indulging in sexuality, can be seen as not active enough in his pursuit of women. In the end, he ends up being the passive one, much too overwhelmed with her sexual being and ends up hurting himself. This shows how psychologically damaging these expectations can be on men. On the other hand, Magda, in turn, takes on Tomek's position of being the voyeur, always looking for him, his telescope becoming her opera glasses. You can feel her longing to be with him and hear that he is safe and returned from the hospital. What she thought and embraced as a purely sexual observation of her, turned out to be a much deeper emotion. She in turn, is removed from this passive idea, of being watched and only being able to lure men in through her sexuality. Magda, has now, become the active pursuer, searching for Tomek. But, in this reversal of fates, Kieslowski has created somewhat of a tragic love story, as the two never become fulfilled in their roles, or end up together. In this sense, Kieslowski could be seen as making a social commentary on how effecting and damaging gendered roles can be on the pursuit of love. 

	As Magda peers from Tomek's telescope, and envisions how he saw her crying over the spilt milk, she envisions a different life they could have lived, where Tomek comes and comforts her. Kieslowski is making commentary on this, saying that if each of these characters was not so psychologically damaged from the reinforced gender stereotypes, they could have expressed their true selves and created a magical, happy ending. His film, through the analysis of Tomek as the voyeur, Magda as the viewed, and the reversal of their roles, is a mockery on the media and the use of stereotypes of agency, man as active and woman as passive, in love stories. A short film about love re-frames the ideas of the gendered voyeur, making an important statement. 



















Works Cited



	Lehmiller, Justin J. (2013). The Psychology of Human Sexuality. Wiley Publishers. 

	Martin, Emily. (1991). The Egg and The Sperm: How Science Has Constructed a Romance Based on Stereotypical Male-Female Roles. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 


	Mulvey, Laura. (2009). Visual and Other Pleasures. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. (pp. 14-27). 

