SusInnov’s Business Plan
Executive Summary
This business proposal plan is addressed to Dr. Deepak Narula, CEO of SusInnov. Currently, SusInnov has $100 million to allocate between two projects: the in-situ extraction technology and the inter-area transmission project. The environmental impact of each, the readiness of production, and how each project will affect relationships with the ILP are all important determinants in the final recommendation. Included is an analysis of relevant stakeholders, my recommendation and justification, and a stakeholder communications plan, which will outline what will be addressed to the relevant stakeholders pertaining to my recommendation.

Stakeholder Analysis 
The main stakeholders involved (those with something at risk in this decision) include relevant shareholders – William Jameson, Lindsey McComb, Dr. Narula, and Donovan Maracle, the Alberta and Federal government, the Indigenous Limited Partnership (ILP) and the indigenous people, and lastly, the environment.
William Jameson, CEO of Canadian Oil Behemoth Inc., and Lindsey McComb, Board Director of COB Inc., share similar stakes in this case. Both have a financial stake, as McComb expects to the company to generate revenues soon, and Jameson is responsible for that to happen.  In addition, both have an interest-based stake to some extent, as they both want to see the plan address a sustainable solution. Jameson and McComb have high sources of power and authority, given their positions. As well, many other stakeholders (which will be discussed) have put a lot of pressure in generating cash flows as soon as possible, making his stakes urgent.
Dr. Deepak Narula, CEO of SusInnov, mainly has an interest-based stake in this decision – Narula truly believes in renewable energy and sees the inter-area transmission technology as a solution to sustaining the Earth for generations to come. Dr. Narula has a high source of power as he has the final say in the decision and his stake is legitimate as it regards the health of the environment and the planet.
Donovan Maracle is a representative of SusInnov and comes from an indigenous community. Maracle mainly has a legitimate moral-based stake, assuming he deeply values his people and the community, as he hopes to see a decision that benefits both SusInnov and the indigenous community.
The Alberta and Federal Government have both funded SusInnov in the form of grants, giving them a financial stake in the decision. They also have an interest-based stake as they want to see economic development, sustainable solutions that reduce greenhouse gases, and support from indigenous communities. Overall, both governments have a high source of power and authority in the decision.
One of the most important stakeholders involved pertains to the Indigenous Limited Partnership (ILP) and the indigenous people. The decision made here is critical in restoring relationships with the indigenous communities, giving them an interest-based stake, a rights-based stake, and a moral-based stake. The ILP also has a financial stake as they have the option to become minority partners in the project when it becomes commercialized.

Recommendation and Implementation
After weighing the benefits and drawbacks relating to each technology, I have concluded that focusing on the in-situ extraction technology first would be best for the business, not only because it is more practical, but also because it would be best for the health of the business and relationships with our stakeholders.
Pursuing this technology is essential for the growth of SusInnov because it a revolutionary method of oil extraction that would give the company a competitive advantage over its competitors. Specifically, it can extract in-situ oil reserves in a way that is cheaper, more efficient, and better for the environment. In-Situ can produce up to 800,000 more barrels per day, it is more economically viable in low oil price situations, and it provides many benefits for the environment, like reducing greenhouse gas emissions by about 80% compared to SAGD. It also provides access to otherwise inaccessible shallow resources due to its low pressure, giving the company options that its competitors don’t have. In addition to providing competitive advantages, the in-situ technology aligns with SusInnov’s sustainability plan due to the number of environmental benefits that it reaps.
More importantly, in-situ should be pursued first because it is ready for commercialization and production, which is important since SusInnov currently faces a lot of pressure by its board of directors and the government to generate revenue as soon as possible. Pursuing this technology would make SusInnov more reputable and would show that the subsidiary is, in fact, capable of bringing new technologies to the market. The in-situ technology would also take advantage of the two pipeline projects in Canada, making it easier for the company to distribute oil to the US and overseas market, thereby increasing revenues.
Overall, once the technology is commercialized and SusInnov becomes more reputable, it’ll have a higher chance of receiving greater funding and grants for the development and implementation of the inter-area transmission. Thus, the inter-area transmission is NOT being dismissed; rather, it will be a longer-term project as it needs more attention and significantly more funding ($3.7 billion).
Since in-situ requires an upfront $100 million from the company, all $100 million should go directly to the in-situ project. Because in-situ is ready for production, the quicker it gets going, the quicker the company can start generating revenue. Once revenue gets generated, it can be reinvested into the inter-area transmission along with additional funding that will come in the future. Our partners would provide the remaining $200 million, which they would be enticed to do due to the benefits reaped.

Stakeholder Communications Plan
To the shareholders of the company and board of directors: I understand that SusInnov has not generated a single dollar of revenue since this subsidiary was created seven years ago, and thus, I understand the urgency in choosing a project that can generate cash flows as soon as possible. For these reasons, I suggest pursuing the in-situ technology – I am aware that senior management is also in favour of this too. By pursuing this technology, not only can we start generating revenue for the business, but we can also strengthen our reputation, which will help us receive greater funding for future projects – like the inter-area transmission project.
To the ILP and indigenous people: I am aware that you are willing to participating in a deal that advances oil development if we respect your status as a sovereign power and provide employment and economic development benefits. Given that we grant your requests, we plan to pursue the in-situ project. The project is ready for commercialization, which means that we can provide jobs and you can generate revenue sooner than through the inter-area project. While some are against the development of pipelines, it’s worth noting that this technology is much better than what’s currently in place; it requires 80% less energy input, zero water consumption and reduces GHG’s by 80% and waste by 20%. Being a part of this project would show the rest of the world that the indigenous people are among the leaders in creating a sustainable earth.
To the Alberta and Federal Government: I understand that you want to see economic development, a reduction in GHG emissions, and support from indigenous communities in regard to the project that we choose. Thus, I believe SusInnov should pursue the in-situ technology as it meets all of your needs. In addition, by choosing in-situ, we can potentially resolve a dispute between a potential partner and the ILP – this will increase participation and support from indigenous communities. Overall, in-situ is much more sustainable than alternative options and is also ready for production.
To the public: SusInnov is proud to announce that it has two revolutionary projects that will bring us one step closer to a sustainable future. Currently, we will be focusing on an in-situ extraction technology, which addresses many of the negative aspects of traditional oil extraction. This technology will not only reduce our ecological footprint, but it will strengthen Canada’s economy by providing jobs and a low-cost method of extracting oil. Lastly, we believe that this initiative will strengthen our relationship with the indigenous communities, as we plan to collaborate with them to implement this technology.
Conclusion
To conclude, I have proposed to allocate all $100 million to the in-situ technology, as it is ready for production and provides a lot of economic and environmental benefits- the benefits from in-situ will give SusInnov a competitive advantage, positioning SusInnov in a spot that is favourable to its competitors. Once SusInnov generates revenue and builds its reputation, we can proceed to funding the inter-area transmission project and make the development and implementation of this a long-term goal for SusInnov. Overall, this aligns with the company’s sustainability strategy and its vision of creating a sustainable future.

To: Dr. Deepak Narula
From: Elaine Li
Date: April 16, 2017

After analyzing the pros and cons of each project, I have decided to allocate all $100 million to the in-situ project for the following reasons. I understand that you deeply believe that the inter-area transmission project is more sustainable and I believe the same. However, SusInnov has been in business for seven years and has not generated a single dollar of revenue. Upon completely a stakeholder analysis, it is clear that this has been a concern for many stakeholders, including senior management and CEO of COB Inc., as well as the board of directors, including Lindsey McComb. I also know that you know the potential surrounding the in-situ technology.
The in-situ project still provides many economic benefits and is significantly more environmentally sustainable than traditional oil extraction methods. It’s operating costs and upfront costs are much less, it emits 80% less greenhouse gases, it’s more efficient as it can produce up to 800,000 more barrels per day, and it provides many more benefits. To supplement this, the two pipeline projects in Canada will allow us to transport oil to the US, increasing revenue. Another key piece of information is that in-situ provides access to otherwise inaccessible oil resources and this is great news because this gives the company a competitive advantage over other oil companies.  By pursuing this technology, SusInnov can create shared value, where we can adhere to the social needs in creating a sustainable future, reduce the capital and operating costs of the company, and build on this innovation, all at the same time. Overall, the benefits drawn from this technology aligns with the government’s and SusInnov’s vision in creating a sustainable future.
The main reason I have decided to invest all the capital towards this project is that it is ready for production. This means that SusInnov can generate revenue quicker. When we start to generate cash flows, we can then reinvest the money towards developing the inter-area transmission project. Also, by generating revenue, we can build our reputation (reputation management) and show stakeholders that we’re a company that can monetize our innovations. Once we’re more reputable, we’ll have a higher chance of getting more and/or bigger grants and funding. This will give us more capital to work with to make the inter-area project seamless.
In terms of the funding commitment from the government, it required that we divert our resources from the in-situ project if we were to receive the first grant. This would mean dismissing an innovatory technology that is still significantly better than traditional methods of oil extraction, which would be a huge missed opportunity. In addition, due to the ambiguity and uncertainty involved with the government’s grant for the phase after the first, it is unlikely that Jameson or senior management will approve of this. This ties back to building our reputation as a company first so that we can then ensure sufficient funding for the inter-area project.
In terms of our relationship with the ILP, I have made sure that I have effectively communicated my reasoning for my proposal, as well as the benefits that it will provide by doing. I made sure to tell them that the inter-area transmission project is not out of the picture and is a longer-term goal that both the ILP and SusInnov can work towards. I also made it clear that while in-situ is not as environmentally friendly as the inter-area project, it is much better for the environment compared to traditional methods and significant improvements in our environment can be made by introducing this technology. I stated that because its ready for production, we can provide jobs to their people and they can start to generate profits much sooner. Lastly, I made sure to conform to their requests in respecting their status as a sovereign power, providing employment, and giving economic development benefits with this technology.
In order to get in-situ off the ground, I have to first address a concern regarding a technical report that discusses the variability of the solvent performance. It was said that you dismissed the conclusions of the report and I need to know if more testing needs to be done; I want to make sure that the technology is actually environmentally sustainable and it’s essential that we leave no grey areas, as the success of this technology will determine the reputation of SusInnov for the years to come. If we need do any testing, we need to do it immediately so we can get straight to commercializing in-situ.
Thank you and feel free to contact me if you have any concerns.
To: Elaine Li
From: Dr. Narula
Date: April 16, 2017

Thank you for your time and efforts in creating you proposed business plan. Although I understand the justifications of your recommendation, I simply cannot adhere to it. While it may seem like a stretch to some, I truly believe that the inter-area transmission project is the most environmentally sustainable solution for SusInnov and for the world. This is a wind-powered energy alternative, which means that it is a renewable resource; that makes it infinitely more sustainable than the in-situ technology, even if it is the cleanest method of oil extraction. Canada also has high-quality wind resources in all provinces – we can utilize that and take advantage of our favourable conditions – similar to your cause about utilizing Canada’s pipeline projects. In regard to the cost of the inter-area project, simulations have shown that the capital invested can be returned pretty quickly, up to four years specifically.
You also argued that the in-situ technology would give SusInnov a competitive advantage, but I can argue that the completion and implementation of the inter-area wind project would put SusInnov miles ahead of our competitors – we would be the industry leader for sustainable energy. The ability to store energy generated from wind technology is revolutionary. This would also advance our reputation to another level; with this, we’ll be able to obtain enough capital to expand SusInnov and explore many more projects in the future.
Similarly, I can flip the coin for your stakeholder analysis and argue that the value of the stakes of the government, the ILP, and most importantly, the environment is far greater than the stakes of senior management and the board of directors. The Alberta and federal government made it very clear that they want SusInnov to explore renewable alternatives and they want a commitment that contributes to a more sustainable energy base in Canada. More importantly, the health of our planet is at stake – there’s no point in worrying about the profitability of our business or satisfying our shareholders if we have no planet. This is the most urgent and legitimate stake in your whole stakeholder analysis!
While the ILP said that they would support the development of pipelines under certain conditions, there’s still a large percentage of indigenous people who are against it. In fact, the indigenous people overall prefer renewable energy, like solar, wind, and biofuels, and they are excited at the prospects of developing a super grid-like project in Canada. Therefore, I see more value in developing the wind transmission project, as we can receive greater support from more communities, and we can also improve Canada’s relationships with the indigenous people.
Speaking of value, there’s no question that the shared value of the inter-area project is greater than the shared value of the in-situ project. In addition to benefiting the relationship between the government and the indigenous people, advancing the energy industry, and contributing Canada’s vision of a sustainable future, the value of the inter-area transmission project will also be shared with the USA. This value would reflect more positively on SusInnov, further improving our reputation.
I personally hired you to work with me because I saw an individual who shared the same vision as I did – I saw someone who believed in the importance of working towards a sustainable future. I understand that you faced many pressures from the company that may have swayed your ultimate decision, but you need to make sure that your values are not swayed as that is what will ultimately drive you. While your justification for your recommendation was strong, I’m disappointed to see that the inter-area transmission project is not a priority to you. I will still consider your recommendation, but it is unlikely that I will follow through with it.





To: Dr. Deepak Narula
From: Elaine Li
Date: April 16, 2017

I just wanted to make it clear that I am not dismissing the inter-area transmission project, and that the development of the project would be postponed momentarily under my recommendation. Because we have not generated any revenue in the past seven years, we have been looked down upon by COB – they even called SusInnov a “noble money sinkhole.” Our shareholders are losing trust in our ability to sustain the business, and if we lose the business, we lose the opportunity to develop a “super-grid” of our own.
This means that all the benefits pertaining to the wind project are not dismissed either – the government will see renewable alternatives from us, the indigenous people will help us build the inter-area project, and we will continue to put our efforts in building a sustainable world. I believe that we can reap the benefits and value of both projects over a longer period of time, while not compromising our reputation as a business and our vision of pursuing sustainable energy resources. Through my recommendation, I simply believe that we would be able to strengthen SusInnov’s reputation, maximize shared value, and please our stakeholders overall.
With all due respect, my values have not been swayed by the pressures of our shareholders, but I believe that my plan of action is reasonable enough to get everyone on board. Ultimately you have the final say, and I will support your decision. However, please keep in mind that my career is young and I would like to impress senior management to the best of my abilities. The company’s reputation and my reputation depends on producing a commercialized project. Should we decide to put all of our money towards the inter-area project, make sure you have the justification to back it up.  
