Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Cognitive and Behavioral Practice 16 (2009) 29–39
www.elsevier.com/locate/cabp

RESPONSE PAPER
The More You Do It, the Easier It Gets:
Exposure and Response Prevention for OCD
Michael B. Himle, University of North Dakota
Martin E. Franklin, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine
This manuscript is one in a series of invited papers to this journal. The purpose of the series is to highlight and discuss the similarities
and differences between various behavioral and cognitive-behavioral approaches to the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD). The first article in this series (Twohig & Whittal) describes the case of “Caroline” upon which the current manuscript is based.
We approach the case from a cognitive-behavioral orientation with exposure and ritual prevention (EX/RP) as the primary therapeutic
approach. We highlight the use of EX/RP because of the considerable body of empirical evidence showing that EX/RP is an efficacious
treatment for both adult and pediatric OCD. Using the provided case vignette, we outline a rationale for EX/RP and describe how EX/
RP might be used to treat Caroline’s OCD. We begin by discussing the theoretical underpinnings for EX/RP and providing a rationale
for treatment. We then briefly discuss the rich extant literature supporting EX/RP as an effective treatment for OCD. We then provide a
detailed case conceptualization and description of the treatment. We conclude with barriers commonly encountered during EX/RP.

T

has seen exciting advancements in
psychosocial therapies for treating OCD. Arguably,
though, the most thoroughly researched and most
effective psychosocial treatment modality is cognitivebehavioral therapy (CBT) involving exposure and
response prevention (EX/RP). EX/RP has consistently
been shown to be effective for reducing symptoms of both
adult and pediatric OCD. In fact, both the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP,
1998) and the American Psychological Association (Task
Force on Promotion and Dissemination of Psychological
Procedures, 1995) have concluded that CBT has garnered
enough research support to be considered the treatment
of choice for both children and adults with OCD.
Although there are a host of specific techniques and
delivery strategies subsumed under the CBT umbrella,
one of the primary goals of CBT is to teach the patient the
skills needed to directly confront fear-evoking stimuli
without engaging in fear-neutralizing rituals. If this can be
accomplished both persistently (for a sufficient duration
of time per trial) and consistently (across trials), the
patient is likely to experience a natural reduction in
anxiety and, more importantly, will eventually be able to
go about his/her day-to-day activities without the need for
elaborate rituals or avoidance repertoires.

Introduction to EX/RP for OCD

HE PAST DECADE

We would like to begin by stating that EX/RP, as we use
it here, does not refer to a theoretical stance, but rather
refers to a collection of treatment techniques that were
borne from behavioral theory. As the name implies, EX/
RP is a collection of therapeutic techniques aimed at
teaching an individual to approach, rather than avoid,
fear-producing stimuli (exposure) coupled with the prevention of fear-neutralizing rituals (response prevention).
That being said, it would be misleading to suggest that we
do not frequently employ other treatment techniques,
such as those commonly used in treatment packages that
emphasize more cognitively-based techniques (see Chosak, Marques, Fama, Renaud, Wilhelm, 2009). Together,
this collection of techniques is frequently referred to as
CBT. We do not consider the more cognitive techniques
included in these packages to be inconsistent with
behavioral theory nor with EX/RP.1 We view them as
ancillary techniques that can be used within a treatment
package to accomplish the treatment goal of providing
opportunities for an OCD patient to experience fear,
observe fear reduction even in the absence of ritualistic
efforts to avoid or prevent feared consequences, and to
1

1077-7229/08/29–39$1.00/0
© 2008 Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

We conceptualize cognition as an active, albeit private, behavioral
process, perhaps better termed “thinking,” which is consistent with a
behavioral analysis. However, for simplicity we will refer to “thinking”
as “cognitive” and when referring to intervention techniques we will
use the traditional term “cognitive therapy.”

Himle & Franklin

30

learn from repeated experience that the feared consequences do not materialize and that obsessional distress
reduces over the course of time if allowed to do so.
It is also important to note from the outset that the
cause of OCD remains unknown and no single model
or theory yet proposed, including behavioral theory, is
able to fully explain how or why OCD develops (Taylor,
Abramowitz, & McKay, 2007). Further, there are no
data to support any single theory in accounting for the
wide symptom variability observed in OCD patients. In
fact, one can be reasonably certain that the underlying
cause of OCD is multifactorial; involving complex
interactions between genetic, physiological, and behavioral (including cognitive, emotional, and social)
factors. Just as psychopharmacological interventions
have spawned from our understanding of the underlying biological processes involved in OCD, CBT has
risen from our understanding of underlying behavioral
processes involved in OCD.
Theoretical Rationale for EX/RP
Early learning models of OCD were based largely on a
two-factor theory of fear (Dollard & Miller, 1950; Mowrer,
1951, 1960). The two-factor model proposes that when an
individual is faced with a situation that elicits a physiological fear or anxiety state, an unconditioned (i.e.,
unlearned) behavioral reaction to escape that state is
initiated. If the action is successful in reducing the anxiety,
it is strengthened, through negative reinforcement, and
thus is more likely to be reproduced in the presence of
similar anxiety-producing stimuli in the future. Through
learning experiences, various internal (e.g., thoughts and
images) and external (i.e., contextual) stimuli acquire the
ability to elicit anxiety and the ensuing escape response.
When the escape response is performed “compulsively” in
response to benign (albeit distress-evoking) stimuli, one is
said to suffer from OCD.
EX/RP is based on the assumption that if an individual
is systematically exposed to stimuli that elicit obsessional
thoughts and associated anxiety, and is prevented from
escaping or otherwise neutralizing the anxiety (ritual
prevention), the anxiety will diminish over time through
the process of extinction and the person will be better
able to function in his/her daily life. Theorists such as Foa
and Kozak (1986) have posited that habituation is aided
by exposure to corrective information in that the
individual learns, through direct experience, that the
feared consequences do not materialize in the situations
that typically evoke obsessional distress. With repetition,
the reduction of anxiety in the previously feared situation
makes it easier in the long run to resist the weaker urges to
escape and/or ritualize.
From a practical standpoint, a behavioral conceptualization focuses on the here-and-now functional relation-

ship between an individual’s obsessions and compulsions,
with the assumption that this relationship can be modified
in treatment without necessarily understanding the
“cause” of the obsessions. Furthermore, the specific
content or form of the obsessions and compulsions is
relatively unimportant except to the extent that they set
the context for preparing specific treatment exercises. For
example, a person who reports distress related to
repetitive, intrusive thoughts of harming their spouse
might engage in one or more forms of compulsive
behavior to reduce this distress. Examples might include
frequent “checking in,” taking measures to avoid situations perceived as “high risk,” or elaborate mental rituals.
In each of these examples, the common underlying theme
is the repetitive performance of one or more rituals that
functions to remove or avoid the distress associated with
obsessional thoughts. In each case, the individual can
learn to manage his/her OCD using EX/RP without
necessarily knowing how the obsession developed. In fact,
throughout the course of EX/RP, analyzing the nature
and cause of one’s obsessions is actively discouraged as this
often leads the person to “fight” with the obsessions, which
is likely to ultimately make them worse.
Empirical Support for EX/RP for OCD
A review of the research literature shows strong
support for EX/RP as a treatment for OCD. Several
recent qualitative and quantitative (i.e., meta-analytic)
literature reviews have evaluated and critiqued the CBT
for OCD literature and each has concluded that CBT is
an effective treatment for reducing OCD in adults and
children (Abramowitz, 1996, 1997; Abramowitz, Franklin,
& Foa, 2002; Abramowitz, Whiteside, & Deacon, 2005;
Foa & Kozak, 1996). Overall, based on these reviews of
the literature, reasonable estimates show EX/RP to be an
effective treatment for 60% to 90% of individuals with
50% to 80% symptom reduction common (Abramowitz,
1996, 1997; Abramowitz et al., 2002; Abramowitz et al.,
2005; Foa & Kozak, 1996; Greist, 2000). Furthermore,
recent evidence suggests that treatment gains are
maintained at 2-year follow-up (Whittal, Robichaud,
Thordarson, & McLean, in press). The treatment improvement rates observed in EX/RP rival those of
pharmacological studies, and head-to-head behavior
therapy versus pharmacological treatment studies suggest
that behavior therapy not only provides longer-lasting
gains but also results in greater short-term improvement
in symptoms (e.g., Foa et al., 2005; Greist, 1996; Simpson
et al., 2004).

Case Conceptualization
The case of Caroline (Twohig & Whittal, 2009-this
issue) provides a nice constellation of OC symptoms that

Response: EX/RP for OCD
will allow us to outline how OCD would be conceptualized
within a cognitive-behavioral framework and treated
using EX/RP. Before we describe how EX/RP might
proceed, it will be helpful for the reader to first review
Caroline’s primary OC symptoms, which are described
below and are summarized in Table 1.
Caroline’s primary obsessional theme centers around
fears that she will cause harm to those around her by
spreading “bad energy” or illness which will result in injury,
illness, harm or death befalling friends, family members,
children, or other individuals in her immediate proximity.
Caroline’s description of her obsessions is elaborate. She
describes accompanying feelings of “dust” on her hands
and mouth, which she believes serves as a medium by
which “bad energy” is spread from herself to others.
When her obsessional thoughts are evoked, Caroline
performs several compulsive rituals, which she believes
will prevent harm from coming to others. Early in the
course of her disorder, she would flick her fingers in order
to remove the harmful dust, but she now fears that this
might spread the dust to those around her. As a result, her
compulsive rituals have evolved to include: (a) closing her
hands into fists whenever she gets the dusty feeling, (b)
biting the sides of her tongue to “dissolve” the dust so it
does not spread, (c) praying for God to protect those
around her, (d) repeating the phrase “just goodness,”
which she believes will protect those around her, (e)
avoiding saying “goodbye” out of fear that doing so will
cause harm to the recipient of the gesture, (f) wiping her
hands before visiting someone who is ill, and (g)

31

performing elaborate rituals to remove contaminants
after visiting someone who is ill (wiping/washing her
hands, washing her clothing, and showering). She also
engages her husband in her rituals by asking him to wash
his hands and clothing after visiting someone who is ill in
order to prevent him from becoming ill. These by-proxy
rituals, often referred to as accommodation, are not
uncommon, especially within close interpersonal (e.g.,
spousal, partner and parent-child) relationships.
In addition to her fears of directly causing harm to
others, Caroline reports a pathological sense of responsibility to prevent harm from coming to others and fears
that if she does not perform specific rituals, those around
her will contract cancer or will be otherwise harmed. To
alleviate the anxiety associated with these obsessions, she
engages in a variety of covert and overt “protective”
rituals, which temporarily alleviate her discomfort. Her
covert ritual involves creating an imagined circle around
the person whom she believes she needs to protect and
mentally “pulling” the imagined circle away from the
person. In addition, she engages in a variety of overt
rituals, including touching the person, praying, and eyeblinking. According to Caroline, these rituals protect the
person from harm. It is also noteworthy that Caroline also
engages in mental checking rituals. She states that when
she hears of an accident (perhaps on the news), she
“mentally reviews” whether she came into contact with the
person involved in the accident. This type of questioning/
checking would be considered a mental ritual designed to
alleviate distress associated with her pathological sense of

Table 1
Caroline’s primary obsessive-compulsive presentation
General Obsessional Theme

Specific Thoughts/Fears

Associated Rituals

Fear of causing harm to others

Fear of spreading “bad energy,” in the form
of dust from her hands or mouth, which will
result in injury, illness, or death to others,
especially friends and family members and
individuals who are ill

Pathological Sense of
Responsibility for harm
befalling others or to
prevent harm from
befalling others

Believing she is responsible for preventing
harm from coming to others and protecting
those around her from harm/danger/disease,
especially cancer

Flicking fingers to remove the harmful dust
Wiping or washing her hands to remove the dust
Closing her hands into fists to prevent dust from
escaping
Biting the sides of her tongue to “dissolve”
the dust
Praying (for God to protect those around her)
Repeating the phrase “just goodness”
Avoiding saying “goodbye”
Elaborate washing/cleaning rituals (washing her
clothing, showering, etc. after visiting someone ill)
By-proxy rituals (accommodation): asking her
husband to wash his hands and clothing when
she fears he has been “contaminated”
Creating an imagined circle around the person
whom she believes she needs to protect and
mentally “pulling” the imagined circle away from
the person
Touching the person to prevent harm
Praying
Eye-blinking to prevent harm
Mentally reviewing

32

Himle & Franklin
responsibility. The function of mental rituals is the same
as more overt rituals, and hence they too play a key role in
the maintenance of OCD and must be directly targeted
via response prevention.
Given her pattern of symptoms, and the generally
robust response of OCD symptoms to EX/RP, Caroline
would be a good candidate for this treatment. The goal of
EX/RP would be to teach Caroline to confront feared
situations, in a graduated manner, while simultaneously
and voluntarily refraining from performing her rituals.
Although the “meat” of treatment would focus on
exposure and ritual prevention, maladaptive OCD-specific cognitions would be identified and cognitive therapy
(CT) techniques could be also included to target these
symptoms, as there is some research to show that cognitive
techniques can be helpful. It has been suggested that
cognitive techniques might increase compliance with
exposure tasks for some patients (Freeston, Ladouceur,
Gagnon, et al., 1997, Leahy, 2007) and compliance with
treatment has been associated with improved treatment
outcome (Abramowitz, Franklin, Zoellner, & DiBernardo,
2002). It has also been suggested that cognitive techniques might improve treatment retention (Vogel, Stiles, &
Gotestam, 2004); however; empirical findings on this
matter are mixed, with some clinical trials failing to
demonstrate differential dropout rates between EX/RP
with and without CT (Whittal, Thordarson, & McLean,
2005) and some recent research showing EX/RP to be
associated with higher dropout rates than CT (Whittal et
al., in press). It is important to note that when cognitive
techniques are adopted and utilized in conjunction with
EX/RP, the inclusion of cognitive therapy techniques is
not meant to change, suppress, or stop the patient’s
irrational obsessions in the moment. To the contrary, the
focus of treatment is to teach Caroline to directly confront
the feared stimulus and deliberately elaborate or focus
upon the fears in the moment, rather than to engage in
attempts to stop obsessions and discomfort from occurring. Most often, patients with OCD have worked very
hard at inherently futile attempts to stop their obsessions.
Unfortunately, rather than decreasing distress, such
attempts contribute to the problem and make OCD
worse. For example, when working with Caroline, we
might use cognitive techniques to teach her to evaluate
and more accurately estimate the actual level of threat
and probability of the negative outcomes that she fears.
We may also teach her that thoughts are often inaccurate
and that she does not necessarily have to listen to her
thoughts or take them literally. Rather, we would suggest
that her thoughts and fears are hypotheses that can be
directly tested during EX/RP. In addition to increasing
compliance with EX/RP, this technique is designed to
“externalize” OCD and to encourage Caroline to stop
“fighting” with her OCD and start “being her own boss.”

This places emphasis on trying to change her behavior
rather than trying to change her thoughts.
In order to help Caroline to conceptualize her
obsessions and rituals from an EX/RP standpoint, we
would first help her to understand that her rituals are
performed to alleviate the discomfort that is associated
with the obsessional thoughts or images. It is often the case
that individuals with OCD fail to understand that although
their rituals are effective for reducing discomfort in the
short term, they are maintaining (or even worsening)
OCD in the long-term. To help Caroline understand how
this relates to EX/RP, we would help her to understand
that the only way for her to overcome her fears is to refrain
from ritualizing and directly experience the outcome.
Although rarely stated explicitly in our rational, these
direct experiences will help her to experience that harm
does not actually occur and that although refraining from
ritualizing is uncomfortable (at least in the short term) it is
not dangerous to herself or others.
During EX/RP, emphasis is always placed on the fact
that patients with OCD can exercise voluntary control
over their rituals but cannot, nor should not, attempt to
control their obsessions or the associated distress in the
moment. In fact, Abramowitz (2006) suggested that two
“commandments” of successful EX/RP are that patients
should (a) expect to feel uncomfortable and (b) should
not try to fight the discomfort.

Implementation of EX/RP
The number and length of EX/RP sessions that an
individual will need will vary considerably, depending
upon the severity of the individual’s OCD symptoms, the
person’s availability for treatment, and a host of other
factors. Our experience (which is consistent with data
reported from randomized controlled trials) is that most
individuals seeking treatment on an outpatient basis will
respond well to 12 to 15 treatment sessions, conducted at
least weekly, and each lasting 60 to 90 minutes. There are
now several manuals that provide step-by-step and sessionby-session guides to implementing EX/RP (e.g., Abramowitz, 2006; Franklin & Foa, 1998; Kozak & Foa, 1997; Riggs
& Foa, 1993; Steketee, 1993). Although each manual
suggests slight variations in treatment, the general session
structure is fairly consistent. The primary components of
EX/RP include assessment of OCD symptoms, psychoeducation and treatment rationale, symptom monitoring,
developing fear hierarchies, in-session and out-of-session
exposure work, relapse prevention, and generalization
training. A sample session structure is provided in Table 2.
Assessment and Review of OCD Symptoms
Caroline’s primary OCD symptoms are outlined in detail
in the conceptualization provided above. Caroline was

Response: EX/RP for OCD
Table 2
Sample session structure for EX/RP
Session Number

Session Goals

Session 1

● Assessment/review of OCD symptoms
● Psychoeducation
● Provide an overview of recent research on the biology and behavioral
characteristics of OCD
● Explain to the patient that OCD is a neurobehavioral disorder with an
unknown cause; focus on removing blame the patient may have placed on
him/herself
● Avoid analysis aimed at uncovering the “cause” of OCD
● Conduct an “inconvenience review” to outline the specific ways in which
OCD is disrupting the patient’s life
● Present the functional model of OCD and rationale for EX/RP
● Work with the patient to “externalize” OCD
● Teach symptom monitoring and rating (SUDS)
● Begin development of fear hierarchy
● Continue hierarchy development and refine hierarchies as needed
● Create separate hierarchies for each obsession/ritual
● Prepare/plan for exposure exercises
● Develop strategies for ritual prevention
● Continue to work with patient to “externalize” OCD
● Review and continue symptom monitoring
● Discuss possible barriers to treatment
● Begin in-session, therapist-guided exposure tasks with response prevention
● Assign out-of-session, patient-guided exposure “homework”
● Review and continue symptom monitoring
● Work progressively through hierarchy
● Periodically assess OCD symptoms
● Discuss and problem solve treatment barriers/noncompliance
● Conduct final exposures
● Take steps to promote generalization and maintenance
● Have the patient create his/her own hierarchies, develop his/her own
ritual prevention strategies, etc.
● Prepare for future challenges and create plan for relapse prevention

Session 2

Sessions 3–12

Sessions 13–15

assessed using the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale
(Y-BOCS), which is the gold-standard instrument for
assessing OCD symptoms in adults. The Y-BOCS has been
shown to be sensitive for detecting treatment-related
change so it can be administered repeatedly over the
course of treatment to assess treatment gains. It is noteworthy, however, that in addition to the Y-BOCS, several
other structured interviews and self-report instruments
possess favorable psychometric properties and can be
included to aid in the assessment of OCD symptoms.
Commonly used structured interviews include the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM (SCID; First et al.,
1995) and the Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule (ADIS;
DiNardo, Brown, & Barlow, 1994). Commonly used selfreport measures include the National Institute of Mental
Health Global Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (NIMH-GOCS;
Insel et al., 1983), the Padua Inventory (Sanavio, 1988), the
Leyton Obsessional Inventory (LOI; Cooper, 1970), and the
Obsessive Compulsive Inventory (OCI; Foa, Kozak, Salkovskis, Coles, & Amir, 1998). Each of these self-report measures
show adequate psychometric properties and are relatively
brief to complete (see St. Clare, 2003, for a review).

On the Y-BOCS, Caroline received a total sore of 22,
suggesting that her symptoms were of moderate severity.
As noted above and convergent with the great majority of
individuals with clinical OCD (e.g., Foa & Kozak, 1995),
Caroline reports both obsessions and compulsions that
affect her life in several ways: She spends considerable
time engaged in rituals, avoids children and individuals
who are ill, avoids some (albeit few) situations and
touching of items, and reports that daily activities require
considerable effort. In addition, she directly involves her
husband in her rituals, which may strain their relationship.
Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation will be provided during the first few
sessions of treatment and periodically throughout treatment as necessary. Psychoeducation has several goals,
which are summarized in Table 2. In addition to providing
basic information about the disorder, it is also important to
provide a working model of OCD that focuses on the hereand-now functional relationship between obsessions and
rituals. By focusing on the present and future (rather than
the past), the therapist can help the patient understand

33

34

Himle & Franklin
the need for, and function of, EX/RP and can also help
the patient understand that treatment can progress without necessarily knowing or understanding what “caused”
the disorder in the first place. For example, it is often the
case that patients will ask, “Why do I have OCD?” It is not
uncommon for patients such as Caroline to have reviewed
and searched events throughout their history for some
clue or answer to this question, often with the hope that by
discovering what caused the OCD they will be able to
somehow fix the problem. For example, Caroline reports a
series of unfortunate events that she might believe caused
her OCD (e.g., strained relationship with her mother for
which she felt a sense of responsibility, physical illness,
several unexplained miscarriages, a friend who died from
an illness for which Caroline blamed herself). These are
certainly unfortunate life events, but these events did not
cause Caroline’s OCD, nor did Caroline cause these events
to occur. When patients are focused on the cause of their
OCD, we find it helpful to explain that OCD is a
neurobehavioral disorder whose causes are not yet fully
understood. Focusing on biological factors helps the
patient understand that OCD is a medical illness rather
than a “learned habit” that the patient can control with
sufficient effort. For some patients, it is helpful to actually
describe the neurobiological and neurochemical underpinnings believed to be involved in OCD. We then explain
to the patient that there is evidence that if the patient
learns EX/RP and changes their behavior, it is possible to
directly affect the underlying neurobiological disruption.
In addition to providing essential information about
OCD, psychoeducation often helps reduce any self-blame
the patient may have and promotes the externalizing of
OCD so that the patient can align with the therapist to
learn new ways to manage his/her OCD (i.e., engage in
EX/RP). Often, patients such as Caroline will make
statements such as, “I am, deep down, a horrible person.”
Such statements are indicative of the level of self-blame
and self-criticism some clients exhibit and highlight the
importance of good psychoeducation. In this case we
might begin by stating, “As I mentioned earlier, OCD is a
medical disorder that often makes people feel pretty
horrible. As you mentioned earlier, OCD has taken over
your life in many ways and you have spent considerable
time and effort fighting with your OCD at the expense of
doing other things you would like to do. Unfortunately,
this fighting hasn’t seemed to work. Perhaps it is time to try
something new.” In addition, this is a good opportunity to
introduce the concept of “externalizing” OCD. We might
say to Caroline, “It sounds like OCD is telling you that you
are a bad person, but one thing about OCD is that it
doesn’t always tell the truth. Perhaps OCD is telling you
things that are not true. Does that seem possible?” We may
also ask Caroline, “What makes a person good or bad?”
Depending upon her response, we might then help her

realize that OCD has prevented her from living her life the
way she would like to, which has made her feel horrible, but
that feeling horrible does not necessarily make her a
horrible person. We can then propose that through EX/
RP, Caroline can learn skills that will help her to function
on a day-to-day basis. For example, if she learns to change
her behavior so that she can pursue more enjoyable
activities, she may feel better and less like a horrible
person. Externalizing OCD is a therapeutic technique that
should be used throughout treatment. It is designed to
distance the patient’s thoughts from his/her behavior and
to align the patient and therapist as a “team” that is
working toward changing the patient’s behavior.
Providing a Cogent Rationale for EX/RP
From the perspective of EX/RP, further attempts to
discover the cause of OCD beyond those presented in
psychoeducation are not likely to enhance treatment. The
primary goal of EX/RP is to help the person understand
how their rituals are currently maintained, not how they
came to be in the first place. Specifically, emphasis is
placed on helping the person to understand that obsessions give rise to distress, compulsions reduce distress, and
any behavior designed to reduce this distress will be
strengthened and repeated. This focus on the present
helps set the stage for EX/RP by providing a rationale for
response prevention. Simply put, the rationale is that
rituals (i.e., avoidance) are the problem because they
“feed” the obsessions, which in turn elicit anxiety and
discomfort. It is critically important, however, to convey to
the patient that the reduction in the frequency and
intensity of obsessional distress is a process that will occur
over time with repeated exposure, and that in fact the
short-term goal of the treatment is to increase this distress
by intentionally confronting the very situations and
thoughts that will provoke it. Put another way, we emphasize the importance of increasing distress and discomfort
(focus on the present), with the knowledge that empirical
studies have indicated that, over time, the patient’s
anxiety and distress will decrease.
Focusing on the functional relationship between obsessions and compulsions also underscores the importance of
making efforts to limit rituals and other avoidance
behaviors rather than trying to derail or change obsessions.
This emphasis is essential to convey because many
individuals with OCD are highly motivated to “fight” to
control their obsessions. Ironically, however, fighting with
obsessions is likely to do more harm than good, as there is
considerable evidence to show that attempting to control
obsessions is likely to increase their frequency and intensity
(Clark, Ball, & Pape, 1991). This concept is introduced
early in treatment in order to help the patient understand
that trying to fight obsessions is much like “shoveling sand.”
The strong emphasis on ritual prevention helps highlight

Response: EX/RP for OCD
the message that while the patient can exert some control
over the performance of rituals, he/she cannot control
(i.e., “stop”) the thoughts or associated distress.
The rationale for ritual prevention should be broached
carefully, as even the thought of refraining from
performing rituals can elicit considerable anxiety, especially early in treatment. We often find it helpful to begin
with examples unrelated to OCD. For example, we might
ask Caroline, “Were you nervous the first time you went
on a date with your husband?” If she answers “yes,” then
we can use this as a nonthreatening way to introduce the
principles of EX/RP. For example, we might present the
following: “It is normal to feel anxious during a first date,
but, had you avoided dating because of your first date
anxiety, what do you think would have been the outcome?” The goal is to help Caroline understand that if she
had avoided her first date with her husband, she may not
have developed a relationship with him, regardless of how
much she desired one. In addition, we might ask Caroline
“How nervous were you on the second date, third date,
etc.?” or “How nervous are you to go on a date with your
husband now?” and “Are you glad that you went on that
first date?” The goal here is to use a non-threatening
example to help Caroline understand that the more dates
she attended with her husband, the easier it became. The
possibility that a similar process might be applicable to
OCD is introduced as a hypothesis to be tested through
EX/RP. In other words, the goal is to help Caroline
understand and accept that if she works with the therapist
to learn a specific set of OCD management skills in which
she is able to gradually reduce her ritualistic behavior, she
will be better able to function on a day-to-day basis despite
having OCD. By doing so across the board, interestingly
enough and as the treatment outcome data in OCD
repeatedly support, the frequency and intensity of the
obsessions are likely to diminish with time. Thus, by
paying less attention to obsessions in the short run, the
therapist can make the empirically supported statement
that their pernicious influence as well as their frequency
will likely be reduced.
It is often the case that even after an individual gains an
understanding of the principles behind EX/RP, they
remain understandably hesitant to fully engage in the
treatment because they quickly understand that they will be
asked to tolerate discomfort (we often refer to this as the
“You want me to do what?” phenomenon). The therapist
might address this by helping Caroline understand that she
is already tolerating great levels of discomfort, but toward
no useful end. This is also when the therapist introduces
the concept of extinction, which, simply put, can be
summarized as “maybe you have to let yourself feel bad to
feel good” and posed as a hypothesis that perhaps “the
more you do it, the easier it gets.” Although the immediate
focus of therapy is reducing rituals, patients with a sufficient

understanding of the EX/RP model quickly come to
realize that by refraining from rituals, they are likely to
experience a significant reduction in anxiety in the long
run because they are no longer performing the escape/
avoidance rituals and are thereby allowing extinction to
occur. They are no longer “feeding the beast,” as it were.
The Nuts and Bolts of EX/RP
After the client is on board with EX/RP, it is important
to gather information about anxiety “triggers” and to help
the client recognize their rituals, which is often difficult
because some patients’ rituals have become so habitual
that they may be unaware of their performance. Helping a
patient to recognize triggers and rituals is accomplished
through a combination of clinician interview and selfmonitoring. Self-monitoring forms can be easily developed to help patients record and recognize, in real-time,
instances of ritualizing. When completing a self-monitoring form, it is important to not just record the time,
frequency, and duration of rituals, but also to record
contextual factors and information about obsessions (i.e.,
feared consequences) so that OC triggers can be
identified. For example, triggers for Caroline might be
leaving in the morning (having to say “goodbye” to her
husband), crowded places where she might spread her
“dust” to others, the sight of children, and social
encounters that might require a hand-shake greeting.
Early in treatment, it is also helpful to teach patients a
method for quantifying anxiety. This is typically accomplished using a Subjective Units of Distress Scale (SUDS).
SUDS refers to a metric in which the client rates her
anxiety on a 0-to-100 scale, with 0 indicating no distress
and 100 indicating to maximum distress. The SUDS scale
can be used to determine the level of anxiety triggered by
various obsessions/triggers and will be essential for
building a fear hierarchy. It also allows a very succinct
way to convey the level of distress being experienced in a
given exposure. The therapist can use this technique to
begin constructing a hierarchy of feared situations that
will be used during EX/RP. Sample hierarchies2 for two of
Caroline’s primary fears and associated SUDS ratings are
presented in Tables 3 and 4.

2
Note that these hierarchies are presented in a somewhat
simplified manner. Hierarchies are highly individualized to the
patient and the individual’s unique presentation of OC symptoms.
In addition, hierarchies can include from a few to several dozen items
and a single client may have multiple hierarchies for various
obsessional fears. For Caroline, multiple hierarchies might be
constructed to address each of her obsessions and associated rituals.
We often tell clients that hierarchies are a bit like the Hawaiian
Islands; there is a big island and several smaller islands, but we deal
with them all the same way: low, medium, high, move on . . . low,
medium, high, move on. In addition, hierarchies will likely be
modified and expanded over the course of treatment.

35

Himle & Franklin

36

After a sufficient hierarchy is developed (typically by
Session 3), patients are ready to begin exposure exercises.
Exposures begin with moderately easy items (typically
SUDS ratings of 30 or less) and gradually work their way
up the hierarchy to more difficult items. Exposure tasks
are conducted in session (with the therapist) but the bulk
of the exposure work is assigned as between-session
homework, which the patient completes without assistance from the therapist. The combination of therapist
and self-performed exposures is important as there is
some evidence to suggest that patients who receive
therapist-assisted exposures demonstrate greater symptom reduction than patients who perform only self-guided
exposure exercises (Abramowitz, 1996). On the flip side,
it is not practical for the patient to conduct all of their
exposure work in session and learning to conduct selfexposures promotes treatment generalization.
Each exposure should be repeated several times until
the patient is able to complete the exposure task with
minimal effort and with complete ritual prevention. For
example, in order to monitor the effectiveness of
exposure exercises, Caroline will be asked to complete
an exposure record in which she records her anxiety
before, during, and after each exposure and she should
not move from the first hierarchy item (e.g., shaking her
husband’s hand) to the second item (e.g., shaking a
family member’s hand) until she is able to complete the
first item with minimal effort and without praying or
“vacuuming” her “bad dust.” As a general rule, the most
important aspects of successful exposure are to (a)
conduct exposure exercises that are manageable, (b)
Table 3
Sample hierarchy for Caroline’s fear that shaking hands and saying
“goodbye” might befall harm on those around her
Hierarchy Item (without praying or “vacuuming”)
Shake husband’s hand
Shake family member’s hand
(and not see that person again for 24 hours)
Say “goodbye” to husband over the telephone
Shake the hand of a familiar child
Shake the hand of an unfamiliar child
Shake the hand of a sick child
Say “goodbye” to husband over telephone +
imagine he dies
Visit sick friend and shake his/her hand
Visit sick friend and say “goodbye”
Visit sick friend + shake his/her hand + say
“goodbye”
Shake her husband’s hand, say “goodbye,”
and state to herself “I hope you die”
Visit a sick friend, shake his/her hand, say
“goodbye,” and state to herself “I hope you die”
Touch ill friend + purposely blow “dust” on that
person + say “goodbye” + state to herself
“I hope you die”

SUDS
20
30
40
45
50
55
65
70
75
80
90
95
100

Table 4
Sample hierarchy for Caroline’s fear of spreading cancer
Hierarchy Item (without washing)
Visit someone ill, delay hand wiping for 30 minutes
Visit someone ill, no hand wiping
Visit someone ill, no hand wiping or hand washing
Visit someone ill, no hand wiping, washing, or
changing/washing clothes
Wear clothes (unwashed) day after visiting someone ill
Visit someone ill, husband shakes their hand, Caroline
shakes husband’s hand, no wiping or washing
(ritual prevention by both husband and Caroline)
Visit someone ill, husband shakes their hand, Caroline
shakes husband’s hand + complete ritual prevention
(no wiping, washing, cleaning, showering)
Visit someone ill, Caroline shakes their hand,
+ complete ritual prevention (no wiping, washing,
cleaning,
showering)
Visit someone ill, Caroline shakes their hand,
no wiping or washing or changing clothes
Visit someone ill, Caroline shakes their hand,
+ complete ritual prevention (no wiping, washing,
cleaning, showering)
Visit someone ill, Caroline shakes their hand,
+ imagine they get cancer and die + complete
ritual prevention (no wiping, washing, cleaning,
showering)
Visit someone ill, Caroline shakes their hand, + shake
another person’s hand (i.e., purposely “spread
cancer”) + complete ritual prevention (no wiping,
washing, cleaning, showering)

SUDS
30
40
45
50
55
65

70

75

80
90

95

100

refrain from all ritualistic behavior during the exposure,
(c) continue the exposure until it can be performed with
relative ease both inside and outside of therapy sessions,
(d) conduct the exposure repeatedly.
As treatment progresses, it is important to repeatedly
monitor and assess a patient’s OC symptoms and add
items to the hierarchy as necessary. However, the goal for
treatment is not only to help the patient work through
their hierarchy, but also to teach the patient to monitor
OC symptoms, create new hierarchy exercises, and to
conduct exposure exercises for new hierarchy items. In
other words, the goal is to teach the patient a set of skills to
help them manage their anxiety or “be their own
therapist.” For example, after mastering several items on
her hierarchy, Caroline may disclose that “I am finding
that I am vacuuming more than I used to when I am
around children.” Such a realization would be a good
opportunity for the therapist to assess Caroline’s mastery
of EX/RP by having her develop her own exposure
hierarchy to address this ritual (e.g., visit a familiar child,
shake a child’s hand, babysit a friend’s child, visit a child
care center, etc.). We often tell our clients that the
ultimate goal of treatment is to make the patient an OCD
and EX/RP expert, thereby making the therapist no
longer necessary.

Response: EX/RP for OCD
The last few sessions of treatment will focus on working
through the most difficult items on the hierarchy and
relapse prevention. If feasible, we prefer to have a patient
work through the most difficult items on their hierarchy
before treatment is terminated, but unfortunately this is
not always feasible. However, if treatment has been
successful, Caroline has learned to identify and monitor
her OC symptoms and how to plan and build exposure
exercises to address them. During the last few sessions, the
therapist should work with Caroline to identify, and
prepare for, future challenges and problem solve how to
address them. This may include follow-up sessions and/or
telephone calls with the therapist, recruiting family
members to provide support, and/or reviewing treatment
information.

Possible Difficulties and Barriers to
Caroline’s Treatment
Perhaps the most common barriers to treatment are
noncompliance with exposure exercises and difficulties
achieving successful response prevention. In the former
case, it is important to work with the client to attempt to
determine factors affecting treatment compliance. Common reasons include lack of motivation, misunderstanding/
disagreement with the behavioral model, interpersonal
factors or poor therapist-client match, moving too rapidly
up the stimulus hierarchy, and comorbid or co-occurring
psychological issues such as depression or social anxiety
that may be more pressing and need to be addressed first.
When a client understands the model and seems motivated
for treatment yet is having difficulty with exposures or
response prevention, it is important for the therapist to
consider whether treatment is appropriately tailored for
the particular client. For example, is the hierarchy
appropriately constructed? Are the exposures relevant?
Are the exposures too difficult? Treatment noncompliance
should be addressed early in treatment and should be an
iterative problem-solving process between the therapist
and client.
Another common barrier to treatment is unintentional
subtle avoidance, which often takes the form of substituting one obvious ritual for a less noticeable ritual that
serves the same anxiety-reducing function. In most cases,
patients are unaware that they are engaging in subtle
avoidance. For example, a person with hand-washing
rituals associated with contamination fears might learn to
refrain from washing his/her hands, but might (either
unwittingly or purposefully) wipe his/her hands on
another surface to remove contamination. Another
example of subtle avoidance is reassurance seeking.
Caroline might have mastered several items on her
hierarchy—for example, she may be able to attend a
public event without praying, but she may ask the
therapist, “I feel like I cause misery and death wherever

I go; do you think I am causing harm to people around
me?” In this case, Caroline may be seeking reassurance
from the therapist to confirm that she is in fact not causing
harm. The therapist must be careful in how he/she
answers reassurance-seeking questions. If the therapist
answers, “No, I don’t think you are causing harm to
people around you,” the therapist can very easily
reinforce OCD by reducing Caroline’s anxiety (albeit
incidentally). In fact, reassurance seeking is a common
ritual in OCD than can be easily overlooked by both the
therapist and the client. We might respond to such
reassurance-seeking questions by stating, “Who is asking,
you or OCD? It sounds to me that perhaps OCD is trying
the back door technique. Do you think it is possible that
OCD is telling you that you are causing harm because you
are no longer ritualizing? Based on your experiences in
therapy thus far, how would you answer OCD?” By turning
the question back on the patient, the therapist can help
the patient recognize subtle avoidance. In doing so,
however, a patient might think that they have suffered a
treatment setback because they did not recognize this
subtle form of ritualizing. When this occurs, the therapist
might state, “These forms of subtle avoidance need to be
carefully attended to but can be viewed as treatment
progress. It sounds like OCD’s old tricks (i.e., old rituals)
are no longer working so OCD is trying to trick you into
other ways of ritualizing.” We would then send the patient
home to carefully monitor for any other subtle “tricks”
that OCD may be attempting to pull.
Yet another factor that may complicate treatment arises
when a patient’s family members have become involved in
rituals. This is especially common for children (who
involve their parents) and individuals within intimate
relationships (e.g., spouse). There is some evidence that
Caroline has involved her husband in her rituals.
Specifically, she asks him to wash his hands and clothing
in order to prevent him from becoming ill. It would be
beneficial to include Caroline’s husband in treatment for
two reasons. First, exposure exercises might include him
directly. For example, an exposure exercise might involve
having him visit someone ill or go to the hospital and
come home but not wash his clothes. Second, he can serve
as a model and support person for Caroline by helping
her identify subtle rituals, provide encouragement, help
her problem solve difficult situations, and model “normal” behavior in situations in which Caroline has a history
of ritualizing. Ideally, Caroline’s husband would be
involved in all aspects of treatment; however, at a
minimum it would be helpful if he understood the
treatment model, the rationale for treatment, and was
willing to participate in specific exposure exercises.
A final factor that might complicate treatment is the
presence of a comorbid psychological disorder. In addition to OCD, Caroline suffers from other sources of

37

Himle & Franklin

38

anxiety, many of which are related to social situations.
Specifically, she reports having difficulty attending parties,
public speaking, writing in public, eating in public, using
public restrooms, being assertive, and initiating/maintaining a conversation, and fear of embarrassment. She
also reports feeling “inferior.” Also consistent with
anxiety, she engages in a variety of avoidance behaviors
to lessen her distress, including dressing conservatively
and avoiding social situations. Although these factors
might complicate treatment (e.g., Caroline may try to
please the therapist, refuse treatment exercises such as
writing, etc.), the therapist can easily work with Caroline
to help her realize that, just as in OCD, other sources of
anxiety can be subsumed under the same model; that is,
avoidance is strengthened by the removal of anxiety and
the more you do it, the easier it gets. Caroline’s social
anxiety might well be incorporated directly into treatment. In fact, discussing this source of anxiety is a good
opportunity to test whether she understands the basic
premise behind the behavioral model of anxiety and to
have her develop and implement exposure exercises.

What Does the Future Hold for Treatment?
As noted above, there is a large body of research
supporting the use of EX/RP for OCD. Caroline’s
prognosis will depend largely upon her progress during
treatment. Most studies assessing long-term follow-up
suggest that the majority of patients that respond to CBT
maintain their treatment gains and that the better a
person does in EX/RP in the short run the better off they
will likely be in the long run (Simpson et al., 2005; Whittal
et al., in press). Caroline has several indicators of a positive
prognosis, including the fact that she is seeking treatment
(suggesting some level of motivation), has a social support
system (husband and family), and a symptom profile that
is amenable to EX/RP. However, as a general rule, we tell
patients to expect that there will be periodic instances in
the future that will prompt OCD exacerbations while
simultaneously encouraging them that if they anticipate
and recognize these flare-ups, they now have the tools
necessary to help them effectively manage the symptoms.

References
Abramowitz, J. S. (1996). Variants of exposure and response prevention
in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis.
Behavior Therapy, 27, 583–600.
Abramowitz, J. S. (1997). Effectiveness of psychological and pharmacological treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A quantitative review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 44–52.
Abramowitz, J. S. (2006). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Advances in
Psychotherapy: Evidence Based Practice. Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe &
Huber.
Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2002). Empirical status
of cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder:
A meta-analytic review. Romanian Journal of Cognitive and Behavioral
Psychotherapies, 2, 89–104.

Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., Zoellner, L. A., & DiBernardo, C. L.
(2002). Treatment compliance and outcome in obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Behavior Modification, 26, 447–463.
Abramowitz, J. S., Whiteside, S. P., & Deacon, B. J. (2005). The
effectiveness of treatment for pediatric obsessive-compulsive
disorder: A meta-analysis. Behavior Therapy, 36, 55–63.
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. (1998).
Practice parameters for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37,
S27–S45.
Clark, D. M., Ball, S., & Pape, D. (1991). An experimental investigation
of thought suppression. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 29,
253–257.
Chosak, A., Marques, L., Fama, J., Renaud, S., & Wilhelm, S. (2009).
Cognitive therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A case
example. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 16, 7–17.
Cooper, J. (1970). The Leyton Obsessional Inventory. Psychological
Medicine, 1, 48–64.
DiNardo, P., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety Disorders
Interview Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV). Albany, NY: Graywind.
Dollard, J., & Miller, N. E. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy: An analysis
in terms of learning, thinking and culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. (1995).
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-I). New
York, Biometrics Research Department, New York Psychiatric
Institute.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure
to corrective information. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 20–35.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1995). DSM-IV field trial: Obsessivecompulsive disorder. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 90–96.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1996). Psychological treatment for obsessivecompulsive disorder. In M. R. Mavissakalian, & R. F. Prien (Eds.),
Long-term treatment of anxiety disorders (pp. 285–309). Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Assocation Press.
Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Salkovskis, P. M., Coles, M. E., & Amir, N. (1998).
The validation of a new obsessive-compulsive scale: the ObsessiveCompulsive Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 10, 206–214.
Foa, E. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Kozak, M. J., Davies, S., Campeas, R.,
Franklin, M. E., et al. (2005). Randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of exposure and response prevention, clomipramine, and
their combination in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 151–161.
Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. In P. Nathan, & J. Gorman (Eds.),
A guide to treatments that work (pp. 339–357). Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.
Freeston, M. H., Ladouceur, R., Gangnon, F., et al. (1997). Cognitivebehavioral treatment of obsessive thoughts: A controlled study.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 405–413.
Greist, J. H. (1996). The comparative effectiveness of treatments for
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 62,
A65–A81.
Greist, J. H. (2000). Obsessive compulsive disorder: A guide. Madison, WI:
Obsessive Compulsive Information Center, Madison Institute of
Medicine.
Insel, T. R., Murphy, D. L., Cohen, R. M., Alterman, I., Kilton, C., &
Linnoila, M. (1983). Obsessive-compulsive disorder: A double
blind trial of clomipramine and clorgyline. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 40, 605–612.
Kozak, M. J., & Foa, E. B. (1997). Mastery of obsessive compulsive disorder: A
cognitive behavioral approach. Therapist guide. San Antonio: The
Psychological Corporation.
Leahy, R. L. (2007). Emotional schemas and self-help: Homework
compliance and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Cognitive and
Behavioral Practice, 14, 297–302.
Mowrer, O. H. (1951). Learning theory and personality dynamics. New
York: Ronald Press.
Mowrer, O. H. (1960). Learning theory and behavior. New York: Wiley.
Riggs, D. S., & Foa, E. B. (1993). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In
D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Clinical handbook of psychological disorders.
New York: Guilford Press.

Response: EX/RP for OCD
Sanavio, E. (1988). Obsessions and compulsions: The Pauda Inventory.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 26, 169–177.
Simpson, H. B., Franklin, M. E., Cheng, J., Foa, E. B., & Liebowitz, M. R.
(2005). Standard criteria for relapse are needed in obsessivecompulsive disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 21, 1–8.
Simpson, H. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Schmidt, A. B.,
Rowan, V., et al. (2004). Post-treatment effects of exposure therapy
and clomipramine in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Depression and
Anxiety, 19, 225–233.
St. Clare, T. (2003). Assessment procedures. In R. G. Menzies, & P. de
Silva (Eds.), Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Theory, research and
treatment (pp. 239–257). West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons.
Steketee, G. (1993). Treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. New York:
Guilford Press.
Task Force on Promotion and Dissemination of Psychological
Procedures. (1995). Training and dissemination of empiricallyvalidated psychosocial treatments: Report and recommendations.
The Clinical Psychologist, 48, 3–23.
Taylor, S., Abramowitz, J. S., & McKay, D. (2007). Cognitivebehavioral models of obsessive-compulsive disorder. In M.
Anthony, C. Purdon, & L. J. Summerfeldt (Eds.), Psychological
treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: Fundamentals and beyond
(pp. 9–29). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

Twohig, M. P., & Whittal, M. L. (2009). A case of obsessive compulsive
disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 16, 3–6.
Vogel, P. A., Stiles, T. C., & Gotestam, K. G. (2004). Adding cognitive
therapy elements to exposure therapy for obsessive compulsive
disorder: A controlled study. Behavioural and Cognitive Therapy, 32,
275–290.
Whittal, M. L., Robichaud, M., Thordarson, D. S., & McLean, P. D.
(in press). Group and individual treatment of OCD using cognitive therapy and exposure plus response prevention: A twoyear follow-up of 2 randomized trials. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology.
Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., & McLean, P. D. (2005). Treatment
of obsessive-compusive disorder: Cognitive behavior therapy vs.
exposure and response prevention. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
43, 1559–1576.
Address correspondence to Michael B. Himle, Ph.D., Department of
Psychology, 319 Harvard St., University of North Dakota, Grand Forks,
ND 58202-8380; e-mail: michael.himle@und.nodak.edu.
Received: February 2, 2008
Accepted: March 19, 2008
Available online 26 October 2008

39

